<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
     xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
     xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
     id="article:about">
  <section id="sec:about-us">
    <h1>About the Project Leads</h1>
    <section id="sec:about-bill">
      <h2>Bill Crouse, Sr. (Seneca)</h2>
      <p>
        William Crouse, Sr., is a member of the Seneca Nation of Indians of the Hawk Clan. 
        He is a faithkeeper, singer, and speaker of the Coldspring Longhouse. 
        As group leader, singer, lecturer, and dancer of the Allegany River
        Seneca Dancers, Bill has travelled all over the United States and Canada. 
        He has performed in Rome, Italy and Wurtzburg, Germany as well. 
        He has worked with the American Indian Dance Theater
        as a choreographer and consultant and was featured in their video
        <q>Dances of a New Generation.</q> 
        His music recordings of Iroquois social-dance music, smoke-dance music and <q>re-mix</q> are a hit with young and old alike.
        As a graphic artist his work is displayed at the Seneca Iroquois National Museum, the Iroquois Museum, Howes Cave (New York), the Seneca Allegany Casino, and many private collectors. 
        He has also illustrated many designs for Native Stitches and Seneca Language Publications.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:about-andrew">
      <h2>Andrew A. Cashner</h2>
      <p>
      Andrew A. Cashner, PhD, is a musician and musicologist.
      He grew up in Richmond, Indiana, a descendant of Anglo-German settlers, and since 2017 he has lived with his family on Seneca land in Rochester, New York.
      His research interests in addition to Native American music including
      music as religious devotion in Mexico and Spain, Athanasius Kircher and
      music in the history of science and computing, and software for
      digital-humanities research.
      Winner of the 2015 Alfred Einstein Award of the American Musicological Society, he is the author of <cite>Hearing Faith: Music as Theology in the Spanish Empire</cite> (Brill, 2020), two volumes of critical editions of <cite>Villancicos about Music from Seventeenth-Century Spain and New Spain</cite> (Web Library of Seventeenth-Century Music, 2017 and 2021), and numerous articles in academic journals.
      He has taught music at the University of Rochester and the University of Southern California. 
      He is active as a performer on piano and organ, ensemble director, and composer, and he teaches keyboard in the ROC Music after-school program for Rochester city students.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:about-goals">
    <h1>Goals for the Project</h1>
    <p>
    Bill introduces his goals for this project in <aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:crouse-intro" />.
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:crouse-intro">
      <aac:youtube key="NaH5Shp45AE" />
      <figCaption>Bill Crouse, Sr., on the goals of this project</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <xi:include href="andrew-personal.xhtml" />
  </section>
  <section id="sec:colophon">
    <h1>Colophon: Technology and Design</h1>
    <p>
    This project was created and published using a system created by Andrew Cashner. 
    The text was written in an extension of XHTML that enables automatic citation and bibliography generation and automatic numbering and cross-referencing for tables, examples, and diagrams.
    The source files were converted using XSLT to HTML for web display and PDF, via LaTeX, for the printable PDF.
    The system uses LaTeX's own citation and referencing systems in the print backend but provides its own for the web backend.
    Custom CSS stylesheets determined the layout and style of the website and custom LaTeX classes and packages styled the print version.
    The main text font is EB Garamond, and section headings are in Venturis ADF Goth Titling and Venturis Sans ADF (all available free of license).
    </p>
    <p>
    Unless indicated otherwise, all photos and videos were created by Andrew Cashner for this project, using Final Cut Pro for editing video and Logic Pro for audio.
    Music transcriptions were made in Dorico.
    Funding for equipment and software was provided by the University of Rochester.
    </p>
  </section>
</article>
