<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="article:andrew-personal">
  <section id="sec:about-goals-andrew">
    <h2>Personal Statement (Andrew)</h2>
    <p>
    It is still the norm in Western universities for researchers to keep themselves out of their writing in order to create a sense of universal objectivity, and to build up a fortification of citations and logical argumentation to forestall any criticism.
    This is very much in contrast to the traditional practice in indigenous communities, where speakers are expected to situate themselves within a place and a network of relationships past and present, but then are understood to be speaking only for themselves on the basis of their own experiences and their nation’s worldview.
    Therefore, as uncomfortable as it feels to foreground myself for a moment, I do feel it is important to say where I am coming from, how I came to this project, and where I hope we go with this effort.
    </p>
    <p>
    I live with my wife and two children in the Nineteenth Ward of Rochester, New York, just west of the Genesee River.
    My house occupies territory that was guaranteed to the Seneca Nation in perpetuity by the 1794 Canandaigua Treaty bearing the signature of George Washington himself.
    </p>
    <p>
    I was born and raised in Richmond, Indiana, a small city east of Indianapolis on the border with Ohio.
    My parents are retired public-school teachers.
    My mom is from my hometwon and her family roots are with the Hostetters, Loars, and other Pennsylvania Dutch (that is, German) settlers of northeast Ohio and Pennsylvania.
    My dad is from southern California but his mother actually grew up on a farm in Indiana and both his parents have roots in Kentucky and Virginia.
    Their ancestors were a mix of settlers from the British Isles and Germany (Cashner probably used to be Kürschner---furrier---or something similar).
    </p>
    <p>
    I am a pianist, organist, singer, and composer.
    I studied music at Lawrence University in Wisconsin, where I met my wife; at New England Conservatory in Boston, the University of Notre Dame in Indiana, and the University of Chicago, where I earned my PhD in the history and theory of music.
    My first job as a college music professor was at the University of Southern California, then I moved to Rochester to teach in the College Music Department at the University of Rochester, where I have taught since 2017. 
    </p>
    <p>
    Before this project, my academic research focused on Euro-American religious music.
    Extending back to my earliest memories of music, singing hymns at the Methodist church I grew up in in Indiana, I have long been fascinated by how people use popular song as a form of religious practice.
    How do people use song to connect with each other and with the divine?
    In my research I started with a project on hymn singing in seventeenth-century German Lutheran communities, partly because of my own German heritage and Protestant background.
    But I had learned Spanish in high school and was frustrated that in seen years of academic study at that point I had never been able to use my Spanish, because music curricula completely ignored the Spanish-speaking world.
    </p>
    <p>
    So at the University of Chicago I transferred the same interests to looking at devotional songs in seventeenth-century Spain and Mexico.
    That led to a dissertation, book, and some articles on villancicos, a widespread form of choral/vocal religious music that opened a window into how people in the early modern Spanish Empire understood music’s role in the relationship between hearing and faith.
    I became fascinated by the way Spaniards and other Europeans used music in the intercultural encounters and exchanges of those first centuries after Columbus.
    </p>
    <p>
    I taught a course several times called Music in New Worlds that looked at different sites of intercultural encounter from Goa, India, to Japan, Brazil, Mexico, and New England.
    The problem was that in each place most of the scholarship focused on the European side of the encounter.
    We would have written sources of European music in these places and just fragments and sketchy descriptions fo indigenous music.
    But at the same time in most of these places the European traditions were short-lived and known today only from those sources, while the indigenous traditions were vibrant oral traditions that still continue today.
    So we had not just two different types of sources, but two different conceptions of history and tradition.
    I was studying <q>ethnic villancicos</q> where Spaniards would imitate and caricature different ethnic groups including indigenous Americans and Africans.
    So we have these datable sources that represent African singing, but through the racist lens of active slaveholders like the priest-chapelmaster Juan Gutiérrez de Padilla at Puebla Cathedral in 1650s Mexico.
    On the other hand we have living traditions of African-derived musics all across Latin America from capoeira Angola in Brazil to salsa, samba, blues, jazz, and many others.
    Those traditions certainly developed in the period I was interested in but most of the written sources are from much later and really they are oral traditions.
    So why should I spend all this time on Spanish caricatures of Africans just because the sources were notated and easier for me to access and control?
    Moreover why should I be focused on Mexico at all when I might be asking similar questions about the history of the land I actually lived on?
    </p>
    <p>
    I began moving toward this project because I wanted to do a study of song as a medium of intercultural exchange among different communities of colonial-era New York, including some settler groups related to my own heritage and Native nations.
    I quickly discovered that there was so much to learn about the Native side, and there were so many unique challenges of that topic, that it was worth just learning about the oral traditions of the nation indigenous to where I live.
    Perhaps someday I will be able to apply what I’ve learned to that larger project.
    Even though my original interest was in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, I realized that the only access to the historic music was through the living oral traditions, and the only way to learn those was with the willing collaboration of a Native knowledge keeper.
    </p>
    <p>
    I met Bill Crouse after I inquired at Ganondagan Seneca Art and Culture Center about hiring a musician to teach in my class at the University of Rochester.
    I began inviting Bill to visit my class annually and slowly got to know him and build up my knowledge of Seneca social dance songs.
    I was reading scholarship like William Fenton’s studies that were largely focused on Seneca ceremony and other restricted knowledge.
    So there had been all this attention on things Seneca people did not want to share, while the social-dance songs had been hardly studied, though Seneca people are not only willing to share these and in fact have used them for cross-cultural hospitality since before Europeans arrived.
    </p>
    <p>
    So I proposed to Bill that we do this project together as coauthors, and we had several discussions about what each of us wanted to get out of it and how we could design the project to be of mutual benefit to us and our communities, though where our interests ever diverged, we would favor Bill’s and what would be most helpful to his community.
    I needed another publication project to strengthen my tenure case (I thought); I wanted to provide resource for other college, secondary, and even elementary educators that would provide reliable info from an authoritative Seneca perspective, because that was so hard to find.
    I also wanted my university to use its resources, derived ultimately from Seneca land, and its space on that land, for the practical economic benefit of Seneca people.
    Bill had his own goals that overlapped with mine but were also quite distinct, as he explains elsewhere.
    Personally I also wanted to feel more grounded in my adopted home, more connected to its history, facing up to the real legacies of my ancestors and being part of the solution, even if only a tiny part.
    I wanted to hlep repair and polish the Covenant Chain of friendship that already bound my community to our Native hosts and help build a better world for my children.
    I hoped to set the record straight on the Native contribution to American music history so my students, colleagues, and children could gain a better understanding of the world than I was given in my own upbringing and education.
    </p>
    <p>
    The project has been profoundly meaningful to me.
    Coming to understand the traditional Seneca way of life has helped me understand my own connection to the place I live.
    I’ll never see a robin again without thinking of Robin Dance and all I learned in researching and reflecting on that.
    <em class="seneca">Gano:nyök</em> has given me an orientation for understanding my place in the world and rooted me in an ethic of gratitude.
    I am a white man, through and through, and I will never be Seneca, I know that.
    My own worldview is still largely shaped by Christianity.
    But there is no psalm in the Bible that talks about maple trees, or robins, or the Three Sisters.
    I know hundreds of Christian hymns but none of them are rooted in that kind of specificity of place.
    I am deeply grateful to Ja:no’s Bowen for teaching me a beginning amount of Seneca and allowing me to be part of her class.
    </p>
    <p>
    </p>
  </section>
</article>

