<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!-- Onëö’ oënö’ article
  2023/03/10 begun
-->
<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="article:corn">
  <section id="sec:corn-intro">
    <p>
    <em class="seneca">Onëö’ oënö</em> or Corn Dance honors a food that both historically was one of the most important foods of the Seneca Nation: <em>Zea mays</em>, an indigenous American domesticated crop that has become foundational for the world’s nutrition
    <aac:paren><aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:corn-coldspring" /></aac:paren>.
    Together with beans and squash, corn (maize) is one of the Three Sisters, known in Seneca as <em class="seneca">Ha’denö:dë:nö:dë’ johehgöh</em> (all of the sisters who sustain our lives).
    Seneca people thank the Three Sisters specifically in the <em class="seneca">Gano:nyök</em>, and this dance connects to that practice of gratitude for the domesticated plants that provide people with food.
    We could group Corn Dance with other food-centered Earth Songs, including Shake the Bush (for beans) and Pigeon Dance (originally for passenger pigeons, which were used as food).
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:corn-coldspring">
      <aac:youtube key="jgNuvwcgZas" />
      <figCaption>
        <em class="seneca">Onëö’ oënö’</em>, Bill Crouse and the Allegany Singers, 
        Coldspring Cookhouse, Allegany Territory of the Seneca Nation of Indians, September 2022
      </figCaption>
    </figure>
    <p>
    Corn Dance was originally a ceremonial dance used in seasonal celebrations of the Three Sisters, but for a long time (at least a century) it has been a social dance at <em>Ohi:yo’</em> and elsewhere on the Seneca Nation of Indians.
    Thus Bill Crouse and his group have been sharing Corn Dance in public for decades, including through recordings.
    At Tonawanda, by contrast, the dance was restored to its ceremonial use in the mid-twentieth century.
    Since this project is based on the Allegany traditions of which Bill is the expert, we share it here and ask the understanding of those whose local protocol differs.
    </p>
    <p>
    As in <a href="quiver.html">Standing Quiver Dance</a>, the singers head up the line of dancers rather than standing off to the side, but in this case they do not move in a clockwise circle.
    Instead they move in a back-and-forth pattern reminiscent of sowing corn kernels or harvesting ripe corn, until by the end of the dance everyone ends up in a kind of knot at the center of the dance circle.
    The songs mostly use a call-and-response texture, again like Standing Quiver and contrasting with many other Earth Songs.
    Perhaps growing out of the same principle of alternation seen in the dance, the songs alternate within songs between leader and singers, and between songs in pitch collections that sound relatively <q>minor</q> or <q>major</q>.
    Most of the songs seem to follow the melodic and phrasing outline of either the first or the second traditional song in the set.
    </p>
    <p>
    Given the dance’s historic connection with ceremonies for planting and harvesting corn, and the archeological record of corn domestication in the Seneca homelands going back at least two thousand years, some form of Corn Dance has likely been cultivated in this land for as long as there has been corn here.
    The state of research does not yet allow more than speculation but it is possible that some of the distinctive musical features of Corn Dance songs may indicate their longevity, such as the unusually high proportion of songs with only four or five pitches.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:corn-story">
    <h1>Story</h1>
    <p>
    Bill’s teachers told him that all of the social dances at one time were ceremonial, but over time they lost their ceremonial functions.
    In his view, Corn Dance is just one of the dances to change its function more recently.
    Like other social dances, this one is used in connection with ceremonies but it can also be sung at other times.
    </p>
    <p>
    On the Allegany territory of the Seneca Nation, the local practice of which is the basis for this project, Corn Dance is a social dance and therefore appropriate for sharing with the public.
    At Tonawanda, however, Corn Dance is considered a ceremonial dance today and therefore some from that community may object to the dance’s inclusion here.
    Originally it was probably a ceremonial song everywhere, but Jesse Cornplanter reported in the 1940s that for many years it had been used as a social song at Tonawanda.
    He also noted that it was recently being used again in ceremonies, and since then it has become a ceremonial song again at Tonawanda.
    Nevertheless, it has remained a social song on the Allegany Territory and elsewhere, and Bill Crouse has regularly shared Corn Dance with public audiences, Native and settler, for decades.
    </p>
    <blockquote class="dialogue">
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">WILLIAM FENTON: </span>
      And now tell me: when does <em>[sic]</em> this Corn Dance performed? When do the people dance Corn Dance?
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">JESSE CORNPLANTER: </span>
      According to the old custom, it used to be, in the time when they had the ceremonies dedicated to the Three Sisters, the  main support of our lives, what we call <em class="seneca">Johehgöh</em>, that was the time they used to dance this dance. But now, since we lost the old customs and the ways of doing things like the old-timers did, we use them now as a social dance in all occasions.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      Are there no dances—Is there no time at Newtown longhouse when the Corn Dance belongs to the Three Sisters and is danced especially for them?
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      It is now. It was introduced, just recently, and for quite a long time they used that dance instead of that Hand in Hand Dance, because this Corn Dance, according to one of the old chiefs, thought it was dedicated to the Corn, one of the sisters that composed the Three Sisters, our main support of life.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      See, the Three Sisters are the corn, and what else?
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      Beans, and squash.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      Squash. These are the vegetables that the old Indian people planted in their gardens.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      Right.
      </p>
      <p><aac:dots /></p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">GERTRUDE KURATH: </span>
      This Corn Dance, in other words, is not danced only at the Green Corn Festival in September, but it can be danced at all other occasions, is that right?
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      Yeah, that is. Now it’s used as a social dance.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      In other words a dance that was formerly intimately associated with celebrating thanks for the Three Sisters now has come to be part of the repertoire of the social dances that you call <em class="seneca">Gaënö’shö</em>.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      Yes.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">KURATH: </span>
      When did that festival of the Three Sisters used to take place?
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      Only twice a year—three times a year. That’s, the Midwinter Ceremonies; oh, the blessing of seeds, when they plant; and then  the String Beans, that is on the Tonawanda Reservation, the String Beans Dance; then comes the Green Corn Dance; then at the last dance of the year, the Harvest Dance, that’s the only time they dance these, what they call The Three Sisters Dance.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      What are the Three Sisters Dances and how many are there?
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      According to the Tonawanda system, there’s only four: The Women’s Dance, the Great Feather Dance, and then, what they call the Standing Quiver or the Stomp Dance, and then the Hand in Hand Dance. And it winds back to the original, the Women’s Dance. That’s the routine of the <em class="seneca">Johehgöh</em> Ceremony.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      Here at Tonawanda. Then the Corn Dance that we just recorded, doesn’t come in the program of dances for the Three Sisters.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      Not here, no.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      But it used to, at Newtown.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">CORNPLANTER: </span>
      It used to, at Newtown.
      </p>
      <p>
      <span class="speaker">FENTON: </span>
      Okay.
      </p>
    </blockquote>

    <p>
    Whether as part of ceremony or not, Corn Dance has always been connected to the growing of corn (maize), a food first domesticated by indigenous Americans in ancient times, and now a major part of the whole planet’s food supply.
    There is archeological evidence of domesticated maize in Seneca territory as early as ten thousand years ago. <!-- TODO ? -->
    Corn was and is cultivated as one of the Three Sisters, <em class="seneca">Ha’denö:dë:nö:dë’ johehgöh</em> (Our Life Sustainers); the others are beans and squash.
    The three plants grow in such a way that each complements the other.
    </p>
    <p>
    Charred remnants from the inside of clay cooking pots from about two thousand years ago indicate that people in this region were cooking corn in ways that would still be recognizable to Seneca people today.
    Two of the most common traditional ways of preparing corn are <em class="seneca">Onohgwa:’</em> (corn soup) and cornbread. <!-- TODO words -->
    Both recipes start by soaking corn in water with ash, an indigenous invention (called <term>nixtamalization</term> after the Náhuatl term for it) that greatly enhances the nutritional value of corn.
    </p>
    <p>
    Some form of the Corn Dance have probably accompanied these traditions of growing and preparing corn since they were discovered so many centuries ago.
    There is archeological evidence of Haudenosaunee instruments and ceremonial tools (including turtle-shell rattles) from two thousand years ago, suggesting long continuity and interrelationship among these practices.
    </p>
    <!--
      - J Cornplanter:
      According to my memory, from what I heard, it has always been used amongst us Seneca longhouses, ages, ages back, handed down from one singer to another.
      And the way I sing is just the way I was taught.

      - Morgan?
      - Handsome Lake on corn
    -->
  </section>
  <section id="sec:corn-songs">
    <h1>Songs</h1>
    <section id="sec:corn-words">
      <h2>Words</h2>
      <p>
      As with other Earth Songs, the words of Corn Dance are vocables with no linguistic meaning
      <aac:paren><aac:ref type="table" href="#tab:corn-dowdy-words" /></aac:paren>.
      Most of the songs include a version of the antiphonal response <em>hai:wihah</em>.
      Songs with similar vocables are usually similar in other ways, as in the several songs that include <em>weniyo:h</em>, <em>wenuya:h</em>, and <em>weganawiyo:h</em>.
      A few recurring vocables sound like Seneca words—<em>wiyo:h</em> (it’s good), <em>ne:wa’</em> (turn, as in <q>your turn</q>), <em>onë:h</em> (now)—but this is probably just coincidence.
      </p>
      <xi:include href="../tables/corn-dowdy-words.xhtml" />
    </section>
    <section id="sec:corn-music">
      <h2>Musical Structure (Andrew)</h2>
      <p>
      In this section I (Andrew) present my own analysis of the Corn Dance songs, as I hear them, acknowledging that this is only my perspective, not part of the oral tradition, and undoubtedly shaped by my own Eurocentric training.
      </p>
      <p>
      As with other social dances, the songs for Corn Dance bear a strong family resemblance to each other even though they contrast in many ways.
      Every live and recorded performance that I have heard includes the same first two songs (or to label it another way, the same introduction and first song).
      That is notable because all the other songs seem to be related to one or the other of those first two songs.
      </p>
      <section id="sec:overview">
        <h3>Songs 1–2 as Model for the Others</h3>
        <p>
        The opening song, or introduction, is in free tempo (no steady beat).
        The lead singer starts with the first phrase (<em>Eyo:h ha:dine:h</em>) and then the other singers join in unison for the continuation.
        Their melody follows a descending outline.
        In the 2002 Allegany Singers recording with Kyle Dowdy singing lead, Kyle begins on approximately <aac:pitch pname="C" oct="4" />.
        The phrases move down from C to B<aac:fl /> and B<aac:fl /> to A<aac:fl />, outlining a stepwise major third.
        Then the last phrase jumps down to F, dips down to low C, and back up to end on F (outlining a perfect fifth), before the concluding <em>Yo:ho:h</em> on C.
        If this were a Gregorian chant I would say it had a reciting tone of C and an F final.
        It outlines the pitch collection <aac:pcset n="0 3 5 7" />, which for convenience I will call <q>minor</q> because the bottom third (F–A<aac:fl />) is a minor (smaller) third.
        </p>
        <p>
        After this slow, solemn, minor-sounding introduction in unison, the next song contrasts in every way: there is now a steady beat supported by the horn rattles; the melody is now a call-and-response between leader and the other singers, and the melody now outlines a major-sounding collection, <aac:pcset n="0 2 4 7" />.
        Though as usual Seneca singers do not have to maintain a steady pitch level, in most versions the final stays the same, so the effect is of shifting from minor to major keys.
        The mood shifts with the change of scales, becoming lighter, more energetic, and more march-like.
        <!-- ?? -->
        In phrase structure, there is now a first pair of phrases, repeated, ending on the F final; followed by a contrasting middle phrase on G (<aac:degree n="2" />), and then multiple repeats of the first pair of phrases.
        Despite these differences, there are commonalities with the introductory song: the melody still traces a descending major third at the beginning and a perfect fifth, dipping down to low C, at the end.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section id="sec:pitches">
        <h3>Pitch Collections</h3>
        <p>
        All the other songs in Kyle Dowdy’s recording can be grouped as being more similar to one of these two songs, distinguished by having a base of either a <q>minor</q> (<aac:pcset n="0 3 5 7" />) collection, or <q>major</q> (<aac:pcset n="0 2 4 7" />), with other pitches added in some songs
        <aac:paren><aac:ref type="table" href="#tab:corn-pitches" /></aac:paren>.
        Song 11 is the only one that mixes major and minor collections, including both A<aac:fl /> and A<aac:na />.
        </p>
        <xi:include href="../tables/corn-pitches.xhtml" />
        <xi:include href="../tables/corn-pitches-grouped.xhtml" />
        <p>
        These songs are distinguished by using a limited number of pitches.
        Eight of the seventeen songs have only four pitches; five are pentatonic.
        Only four songs have more than five pitches, and of those, only song 11—the one that mixes major and minor—has seven pitches.
        Though the songs based on the <pcset n="0 2 4 7" /> collection sound minor, no songs in this set include <aac:degree accid="fl" n="6" />.
        This is a higher proportion of songs with five or fewer pitches than in <em class="seneca">Gayo:waga:yöh</em> (Old Moccasin Dance, mostly six-tone), and much higher than the mostly diatonic <em class="seneca">Ë:sgä:nye:’</em> (New Women’s Shuffle Dance) songs.
        Among dances I’ve studied so far, only <em class="seneca">Jö:yaik oënö’</em> (Robin Dance) has more songs with five or fewer pitches (out of six Robin Dance songs on the recordeding studied, four have four tones and 2 have five).
        There is more variation in the <em class="seneca">Ga’da:šo:t</em> (Standing Quiver Dance) songs, which include a similar alternation between major- and minor-sounding collections.
        The set of pitches used in an Earth Song forms part of the <q>palette</q> distinctive to that dance and is one element that creates the sense of family relationships within the songs.
        Comparison of pitch collections may be one data point that could eventually be used to establish relative dates of the Earth Songs—could those with fewer pitches perhaps be older?—though vastly more research is needed.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section id="sec:phrases">
        <h3>Phrases and Formal Structure</h3>
        <p>
        Similar to Old Moccasin Dance, the songs for Corn Dance can be grouped into only a few types of phrase structures.
        I hear three phrases in the opening song, where the last two phrases have the same ending: <em>a bc dc</em>.
        The largest group of phrase structures we can identify follows this three-phrase pattern and includes nine songs.
        The next group follows the pattern of song 2 (the first <q>major</q> song, with call-and-response).
        Three songs in this group have three sections with repeated first and third sections, for example <em>aaaa b aaaa</em> or <em>ab ab ab c ab ab ab</em>.
        The last group of phrase structures, including four songs, has four phrases in two parallel groups, where the even-numbered subphrases end the same way, for example <em>ab cd, cb cd</em> or <em>a b c b<aac:prime /></em>.
        </p>
        <p>
        While pitch collections do not correlate with these groups—there are <q>minor</q> and <q>major</q> songs in both three- and four-phrase groups—songs within one of these three phrasing groups do follow similar melodic outlines.
        The three-phrase songs follow the basic descending pattern of the opening song: 
        <aac:degree n="5" />–<aac:degree n="4" />–<aac:degree n="3" />–<aac:degree n="1" />(–low <aac:degree n="5" />–<aac:degree n="1" />).
        Notably both <q>minor</q> and <q>major</q> songs with this phrasing follow that same descending outline.
        The four-phrase songs, all <q>minor</q>, also outline the same descent but their parallel phrase structure requires them to repeat the last part of it:
        <aac:degree n="5" />–<aac:degree n="4" />–<aac:degree n="3" />–<aac:degree n="1" />–<aac:degree n="3" />–<aac:degree n="1" />(–low <aac:degree n="5" />–<aac:degree n="1" />).
        One could certainly hear these four-phrase songs as just the same pattern as the three-phrase songs, extended by repeating the final phrase.
        The other group, the three-section call-and-response songs, use a different outline, stressing <aac:degree n="1" /> in the first and last sections, and a contrasting <aac:degree n="2" /> in the middle section.
        </p>
        <!-- style, outline comparisons to other songs from other dances, e.g., call-and-response,^1-^2-^1 with Ga'da:sot or Gayo:waga:yoh? -->
      </section>
      <section id="sec:corn-music-antiphonal">
        <h3>Call and Response</h3>
        <p>
        As in the Standing Quiver Dance (and unlike many other Earth Songs), several of the songs in Corn Dance are antiphonal: that is, they feature a call-and-response texture.
        The string of <q>major</q> songs in Dowdy’s set, songs 2–5 all feature short call-and-response phrases with the response <em>hai:wihah</em>.
        In Dowdy’s version, the following songs are all unison except song 7, until the final song closes with an antiphonal section (<em>wigoh</em>/<em>aheh</em>).
        </p>
        <p>
        Are there traces, though, of antiphonal texture in the other songs?
        Several of the <q>unison</q> songs feature repetitive phrases and response-like phrases that suggest these songs might once have been sung antiphonally, or that they descend from earlier antiphonal versions.
        Dowdy’s songs 6 and 7 are intriguing in this respect: they contain the same melodic and rhythmic material, but song 6 is unison and song 7 is call-and-response.
        In song 7, the melody that was used in song 6 is now broken up into phrases sung by the lead singer, to which the others respond <em>hai:eh ya:hah</em> in quarter notes (one-beat notes) on F (the final).
        That response was already present in song 6 but there it was part of the unison melody.
        <!-- example -->
        Other songs include the same kind of perhaps-vestigial response phrase: song 12 (<em>hai:eh ga:ha-ah</em>), 13 (same as previous), 14 (<em>ya:ha-ah</em>), and 15 (<em>hai:eh ga:ha-ah</em>).
        Could these songs once have been antiphonal, or are there antiphonal versions of them?
        </p>
        <p>
        Similarly, in the later Allegany Singers recording (2022) with Jake George singing lead, the group sings a variant that is identical in every way to Dowdy’s song 9, except antiphonal instead of unison.
        In the later version, all the repeated phrases are sung as call and response, where Dowdy had the groups sing both call and response together.
        <!-- example -->
        </p>
        <p>
        Of course, when Jesse Cornplanter recorded Corn Dance songs by himself in 1948 and 1954, out of necessity he sang both call and response in all his antiphonal songs.
        Did recordings like that perhaps contribute to some confusion about which songs were antiphonal, or about which parts of those songs were the call and which the response?
        Or was there a common practice of treating the antiphonal parts as optional?
        </p>
        <xi:include href="../tables/corn-antiphonal.xhtml" />
      </section>
      <section id="sec:corn-music-conclusions">
        <h3>Conclusions and Questions</h3>
        <p>
        Considering all of these analytical observations together, I would propose, first, that the basic outlines of the first two songs form the basis of all the others.
        Most of the call-and-response songs follow song 2 in collection, phrasing, melodic outline, and style.
        Most of the unison songs follow song 1 in phrasing and melodic outline, though some match the outline of song 1 with the collection of song 2.
        In two cases, there are highly similar songs in both the three- and four-phrase groups:
        song 7 (three phrases) repeats the same melodic and rhythmic material as song 6 (four phrases), but with a different phrase structure.
        Similarly song 17 (three phrases) is closely similar to song 15 (four phrases).
        That the same musical ideas can be used to make a song of both phrase types gives strength to the idea that this distinction of phrase types is important, and may help clarify how those types work.
        In an analogous fashion, sometimes the existence of a hybrid clarifies a principle of contrast elsewhere, as in song 11 that includes both <q>major</q> and <q>minor</q> elements within the same song.
        Likewise, the final song begins like a three-phrase song in unison but then ends with a repeated antiphonal section that recalls song 2, reinforcing the contrast between unison and call-and-response textures.
        </p>
        <xi:include href="../tables/corn-phrases.xhtml" />
        <p>
        These conclusions raise several questions that I hope to answer with further research:
        <ul>
          <li>Is there a principle of contrast at work here, between minor and major collections, three- and four-phrase structures, antiphonal and unison textures?</li>
          <li>Is that principle related to other aspects of Corn Dance, for example the way its choreography involves frequent changes of direction as though sowing seeds?</li>
          <li>Is there a difference between dances that include songs with a family resemblance and dances where all the songs are essentially variants of the same tune, as in Robin Dance, and perhaps with the Corn Dance songs that seem to be modeled on song 1?</li>
          <li>Despite the major/minor (<aac:degree accid="fl" n="3" />/<aac:degree accid="na" n="3" />) contrast between songs, is the real common thread the descending stepwise major third (C–B<aac:fl />–A<aac:fl /> or A–G–F)? Or is this negated by the fact that song 11 features both minor and major <aac:degree n="3" />?</li>
          <li>Most intriguingly, is the prevalence of limited-collection, 4-pitch songs an indication of age or longevity?
            Could this or any other musical feature be used to establish relative dates of this and other songs?</li>
        </ul>
        </p>
        <p>
        The second major conclusion I would draw is to speculate that Corn Dance was originally all antiphonal.
        Even most of the unison songs contain elements that sound like responses, or feature repetitive phrase endings that may derive from responses.
        <ul>
          <li>Is the antiphonal character why this and Standing Quiver, which is also (mostly) antiphonal, are the only dances in which the singers must move in the line with the dancers rather that staying stationary off to one side. </li>
          <li>Is the antiphonal texture part of the principle of contrast or alternation discussed above?</li>
          <li>Is it connected to the idea of the community going out into the fields, similar to Standing Quiver with its concept of going on a journey?</li>
          <li>Are there vestigial or embedded responses in other Earth Songs that are now sung as unison?</li>
          <li>Do the antiphonal vs. unison shifts related to Corn Dance’s shifting status as a ceremonial vs. social song, and the differing phases of its use in Three Sisters ceremonies? (And why did the people stop using Corn Dance for ceremony?)</li>
        </ul>
        </p>
      </section>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:corn-versions">
      <h2>Versions</h2>
      <section id="sec:corn-versions-george">
        <h3>Jake George and the Allegany Singers, 2022</h3>
        <p>
        In September 2023 the Allegany Singers recorded a set of Corn Dance songs for this project in the cookhouse of the Steamburg Community Center on <em class="seneca">Ohi:yo’</em>, next to Coldspring Longhouse
        <aac:paren><aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:corn-coldspring" /></aac:paren>.
        Jake George sang lead.
        The set was very close to that recorded by the same group 21 years earlier with Kyle Dowdy singing lead.
        Jake led the group in Dowdy’s song 1, 2, 5, 13, and a variant of 9.
        Suited to his higher voice, Jake chose a pitch level one step higher (<q>final</q> on G instead of Dowdy’s F).
        His tempos were much slower, at about 60 beats per minute instead of Dowdy’s 78.
        Otherwise the songs were almost identical, with song 2 differing by only a single pitch, and one different vocable in song 5 (<em>Hai</em> for the first syllable instead of <em>We</em>) and in song 13 (<em>weayo:</em> instead of <em>weniyo</em>).
        </p>
        <p>
        After the <q>minor</q> opening, Jake selected only <q>major</q> songs.
        Jake also selected only songs in a call-and-response texture.
        For this recording the group sang a variant antiphonal version of Dowdy’s song 9, whereas Dowdy’s version was in unison.
        The repeated phrases in this song make more sense as calls and responses.
        <!-- why didn't Kyle do it that way? -->
        </p>
      </section>
      <section id="sec:corn-versions-crouse">
        <h3>Bill Crouse and the Allegany Singers, 2023</h3>
        <p>
        In fall 2023 Bill Crouse recorded two sets of Corn Dance songs: one at Ganondagan (Victor, New York) with his daughters singing the responses, and one with the Allegany Singers and Dancers for Indigenous Peoples’ Day at Genesee Valley Park in Rochester, New York.
        With his daughters, Bill selected four songs, equivalent to Dowdy’s songs 1, 2, 4, and 7.
        Unsurprisingly he sang song 2 the same way Jake did in 2022; the others are nearly identical to Dowdy’s version except that Bill sings different words to song 7 (<em>Yo:nava</em> instead of <em>Yo:ono</em>).
        <!-- TODO v vs w ? -->
        He selected all call-and-response songs and only the last one has a <q>minor</q> collection.
        Typical of Bill’s relatively more intense singing style, his final was much higher, close to B<aac:fl />; the tempo was faster than Jake at 75 beats per minute, but slower than Jesse Cornplanter (who may have been hurrying to fit things onto a limited recording medium, see <a href="#sec:corn-versions-cornplanter">below</a>).
        </p>
        <p>
        For the Indigenous Peoples’ Day presentation, Bill selected Dowdy’s songs 1, 2, 4, and 9.
        All were <q>major</q> and antiphonal, since Bill led song 9 as a call-and-response song in the same way Jake did in 2022.
        Characteristic of this veteran performer, Bill’s final and tempo were almost exactly the same as in his recording from a month previous.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section id="sec:corn-versions-cornplanter">
        <h3>Jesse Cornplanter, 1948 and 1954</h3>
        <p>
        Three recordings of Jesse Cornplanters singing Corn Dance songs survive in the American Philosophical Society as part of William Fenton’s papers.
        They were recorded at the Tonawanda Reservation, on August 26, 1948, and March 23, 1954.
        (The earlier one specifies it was recorded at Cornplanter’s house.)
        A third recording is probably from the same 1954 session.
        <!-- 
          1948: APS Mss.Rec. 138.06/02.01
          1954: APS Mss.Rec. 138.07/04.01 138.07/04.16
        -->
        Cornplanter introduces the 1948 recording as the Seneca Corn Dance, <q>Newtown version</q>.
        That recording also includes an interview with William Fenton and Gertrude Kurath.
        </p>
        <p>
        Cornplanter sings ten songs on the 1948 recording, comparing to the 2002 Dowdy reference version
        <aac:paren>
        <aac:ref type="table" href="#tab:corn-cornplanter-1948">tables</aac:ref>
        <aac:ref type="table" href="#tab:corn-cornplanter-1954"> and</aac:ref>
        </aac:paren>.
        The shorter 1954 recording, a fragment, includes two songs: Dowdy song 12, and then Dowdy song 13 and 2 combined.
        </p>
        <xi:include href="../tables/corn-cornplanter-1948.xhtml" />
        <xi:include href="../tables/corn-cornplanter-1954.xhtml" />
        <p>
        In 1948, Cornplanter’s final was around F<aac:sh />, and the 1954 recordings were slightly lower in pitch, on E (longer recording) and F<aac:na />.
        His tempo slowed down for each successive recording, from 92 beats per minute in 1948 to 90 and then 85 in 1954.
        </p>
        <p>
        These recordings, stemming from practice at Newtown, include four unique songs that the Allegany Singers never recorded (in the 1948 recording, Cornplanter’s songs 2, 3, 7, and 9).
        The others only differ slightly from those sung at <em class="seneca">Ohi:yo’</em> today.
        The unique songs are most similar in style and outline to Dowdy’s song 14, following a three-phrase pattern similar to <em>ab cd cd</em>.
        <!--
          2: ab cb' c'b'
          3: ab cb' b'd
          7: abc de d'e?
          9: abc b' c'
        -->
        They all share a <q>major</q> pitch collection of <aac:pcset n="0 2 4 7 9" />; in the 1948 recording Cornplanter’s song 9 adds <aac:degree n="4" /> to produce a set of <aac:pcset n="0 2 4 5 7 9" />.
        <!-- TODO more? -->
        </p>
        <p>
        In each recorded set, Cornplanter also sings songs that combine separate ones in the Allegany Singers’ recordings: he combines Dowdy’s songs 13 and 2 as a single song, and does the same with 13 and 2.
        Though the recording, with only one singer, does not make clear which parts are antiphonal, Dowdy’s song 13 and 14 are unison (with perhaps the remnant of what used to be a response), while song 2 has an obvious call-and-response texture.
        Cornplanter’s practice is interesting, then, because it would seem to strengthen the argument that a principle of contrast and alternation is central to Corn Dance, and restores an element of antiphony to unison songs that perhaps had lost it.
        </p>
        <p>
        In an interview with William Fenton and Gertrude Kurath on the 1948 recording, Cornplanter explains how he learned the songs and identifies two songs as originating at Onondaga:
        </p>
        <!-- TODO insert audio -->
        <blockquote class="dialogue" id="fenton-cornplanter-interview-corn-1948">
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">William Fenton: </span>
          Let’s talk about the Corn Dance a moment, Jesse. 
          Where did these songs you sang originate? 
          Where did they come from?
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Jesse Cornplanter: </span>
          According to my memory, from what I heard, it has always been used amongst us Seneca longhouses, ages, ages back, handed down from one singer to another.
          And the way I sing is just the way I was taught.
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Fenton: </span>
          Who taught you to sing these songs?
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Cornplanter: </span>
          My father was a great singer of all those social and other ceremonial dances. 
          And then he taught me all those songs.
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Fenton: </span>
          So your father was Edward Cornplanter, the one they call <em>Sošendo:wah</em>?
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Cornplanter: </span> 
          Yes he was.
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Fenton: </span>
          There were two songs that you told me while we were playing it back, that your father brought with him from Onondaga. 
          Which two songs were they? 
          If we could identify those on the record, it would make it easier.
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Cornplanter: </span> 
          It was that song that goes like this: 
          [sings the start of his song 8]
          That was one of ’em.
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Fenton: </span>
          And what was the other song that your father brought back from Onondaga longhouse?
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Cornplanter: </span> 
          [sings the start of his song 7]
          Those are the ones.
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Fenton: </span>
          Those are the two that came from Onondaga longhouse near Syracuse, New York?
          </p>
          <p>
          <span class="speaker">Cornplanter: </span> 
          Right.
          </p>
        </blockquote>
        <p>
        The first of the two songs Cornplanter says came from Onondaga is the same as Dowdy’s song 10; the other is only recorded by Cornplanter.
        Were these songs originally part of Corn Dance at Tonawanda but then lost, and had to be restored from the Onondaga repertoire?
        Did they also come to Allegany from Onondaga, or were they part of their practice all along?
        How many other songs in sets today were brought from other places?
        Only additional comparative study will tell.
        </p>
        <!-- TODO put this before analysis? -->
      </section>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:corn-movements">
    <h1>Movements</h1>
    <!--
      WF: I think that's enough about the Corn Dance. Is there anything more you think of, Gertrude, that we ought to include?

      Gertrude Kurath: Yes, I think it's an interesting point, that he said that one song, in one song the dancers don't just go in a circle but weave in and out and then wind up into a knot. Now which song was that?

      WF: The Corn Dance, but where? Where in the Corn Dance do they finally...

      GK: Yeah, which song was that?

      JC: When they start to sing that (sings) "Wihah. Yoyowineh wihah..." [song 2] all those songs in a group. Then they all start to wind around, they come back they go round seven times in formation. 

      WF: Yeah, they form into... the dance reverses itself if I remember, and the people all end up in a cluster.

      JC: Some of them go that way and others going back.

      WF: Clockwise and counterclockwise.

      GK: You go in a sort of serpentine path?

      WF: At the start. They start to weave in a serpentine fashion, and then they end up all in a group, with some of the people going in one direction, and some in another. And then finally the dance breaks up, is that [right]?

      JC: Uh-huh. It depends on whether the leader follows them, or leads them.

      WF: And how does the leader terminate or end the song?

      JC: He just raise up his rattle and shake it two, three times. That shows that's, it's the end of it.
    -->

  </section>
</article>
