<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="article:relationship">
  <section id="sec:relationship-intro">
    <p>
    This project centers around three linked pairs of concepts: Earth/land, history/tradition, and relationship/reciprocity.
    Seneca people, like many other indigenous nations, have traditionally emphasized that all people, animals, and other beings and forces on Earth are connected to each other in reciprocal (two-way) relationships.
    This idea is fundamental to Seneca song and dance practices. 
    As the name suggests, Earth Songs connect people to Mother Earth and all the other beings that draw life from her.
    The songs and dances extend the daily Seneca practice of saying <em class="seneca">Gano:nyök</em>, the Thanksgiving Address that gratefully acknowledges the people’s reciprocal connection to the rest of Creation and its Creator.
    </p>
    <p>
    Seneca oral tradition says that many songs were gifts to people from other beings like the robin or the Corn Spirit, and they were given to enable humans to have healthy, mutual relationships with those beings.
    Likewise, Seneca people have shared songs as a way to allow others to have good relationships with them, including the Haudenosaunee, other Native nations, and settler nations.
    The Earth Song repertoire includes several dances that were borrowed from other Native nations.
    Earth Songs are shared in an event called a Sing in which a song competition is integrated into a communal mutual-aid activity.
    The songs shared build relationships across local communities, between different Haudenosaunee nations, and across generations.
    Another form of Native intercultural sharing happens through Smoke Dance, an adaptation of traditional Earth Songs for the purpose of competitive powwow dancing.
    </p>
    <p>
    These ways of using Earth Songs to build reciprocal relationships stand in stark contrast to the exploitative and abusive uses of music by settler-colonialists throughout Seneca history.
    From mission churches to boarding schools, colonizers sought to eliminate Haudenosaunee traditional songs and replace them with Euro-American music.
    Nevertheless, many Haudenosaunee people still found creative ways to adapt, demonstrating success in Westernized forms while also integrating and adapting their own traditions.
    While anthropologists and scholars have made a few efforts at cataloging, collecting, and analyzing Seneca music, their work has had little impact because it has not reflected Haudenosaunee views or served Haudenosaunee needs.
    </p>
    <p>
    Earth Songs today continue to serve their traditional purpose in fostering reciprocal relationships, as demonstrated by the work of Bill Crouse and other Seneca presenters when they share these songs outside current Seneca territory, including on this site.
    Two images from colonial-era Seneca diplomacy still provide a viable framework for Seneca-settler relationships: the Two-Row Wampum and the Covenant Chain.
    Our work on this project is informed by both concepts.
    These principles were also embodied in an event in summer 2023, in which the town of Caneadea, New York, formally invited the Seneca Nation to establish friendship with them, and celebrated the relationship through an event that centered on Bill Crouse’s group sharing Earth Songs including the Friendship Dance.
    That event gives a glimpse of how Earth Songs might enable a new growth of reciprocal relationships between Native and non-Native peoples.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationship-thanksgiving">
    <h1><em class="seneca">Gano:nyök</em>: Everything Starts with Gratitude for Relationships</h1>
    <p>
    Every traditional Haudenosaunee formal gathering begins and ends with an address known as <em class="seneca">Gano:nyök</em>, or the Thanksgiving Address.
    This speech is also called The Words before All Else.
    On Seneca territory, the speaker would normally be a male elder, and each speaker would give his own version of the address reflecting the circumstances of time and place, but always following a set traditional pattern.
    </p>
    <p>
    <aac:TODO note="cite sources including Kimmerer">
    The speaker begins the address by inviting all present to join their minds as one with him in giving thanks, and then begins to move through a series of thanksgivings addressed to different beings or elements of the world.
    The first element is always <em class="seneca">ha’deögwe’da:geh</em>, all the different kinds of people.
    </aac:TODO>
    Next the speaker thanks Our Mother the Earth, and then acknowledges, in ,
    the waters, medicinal plants, grasses, berries, strawberries, the Three Sisters (corn, beans, and squash), forests, the maple trees, animals, birds, Our Elder Brother the Sun and Our Grandmother the Moon, the stars, the winds, and others, concluding with <em class="seneca">Shögwajënö’kda’öh</em>, Our Creator.
    </p>
    <p>
    The Thanksgiving Address provides traditional Seneca people with one of their most central concepts and tools for thinking and making sense of the world.
    <aac:TODO note="image, link">
    For example, the Seneca-Iroquois National Museum in Salamanca is entirely organized according to Gano:nyök.
    </aac:TODO>
    Visitors move in the traditional Haudenosaunee counterclockwise circle through exhibits highlighting the different parts of the address, and the other topics on history, arts, and dance are organized in relationship to those parts.
    <aac:TODO note="cite">
    The Seneca intellectual John Mohawk used the address as the organizing structure for several of his writings, rather the way Christian theologians used the Apostles’ Creed or the Lord’s Prayer to structure their works.
    </aac:TODO>
    Ja:no’s Bowen, director of the Seneca Language Department on the Allegany Territory, starts and ends all of her language class sessions with some version of Gano:nyök.
    In her classes (which Andrew attended 2020–2024) she uses the Thanksgiving Address as a source of vocabulary, grammar, and a focal point for teaching Seneca values and worldview.
    </p>
    <p>
    <aac:TODO note="cite Mohawk, Shenandoah, Kimmerer, Fixico, Broyles-Gonzalez">
    The Thanksgiving Address provides the particular Seneca way of centering life in a web of reciprocal relationships, as most other indigenous American nations do.
    </aac:TODO>
    Humans are understood to be lesser, weaker members of a larger extended family that includes non-human creatures, animals, and plants, and beyond-human beings like the spirits of sun, moon, and stars, within a worldview where, as John Mohawk says, everything that is real has spirit and can be related to as a being.
    </p>
    <p>
    The Seneca language used in the address aids in this way of thinking because the grammar requires constant attention to relationships.
    The speaker addresses not <q>Earth</q> generally but <em class="seneca">Ëthino’ëh yöëdzade’</em>, where the <em>ethi-</em> prefix means a relation of all of us to her—<q><em>Our</em> Mother the Earth</q>.
    Likewise for the <em class="seneca">shogwa-</em> in <q>Our Creator</q>.
    <aac:TODO note="cite grammar, dictionary">
    There are fifteen nominative pronouns in Seneca and some thirty transitive pronouns that convey highly specific relationships.
    </aac:TODO>
    For example, the everyday equivalent of goodbye is <em class="seneca">ësgöge’ae’</em> (I will see you again), but only if the speaker is addressing a single person.
    <aac:TODO note="check with Ja:no’s">
    To say goodbye to two people (but not more) of mixed genders, it would have to be <em class="seneca">ësknige’ae’</em>; saying farewell to a whole group would be <em class="seneca">ësgwage’gae’</em>
    </aac:TODO>
    The language aligns with a cultural pattern in which people generally keep close track of who everyone is related to.
    A member of the Seneca community always knows how they and others are situated in relation to others.
    </p>
    <p>
    Those relationships are understood to be two-way reciprocal exchanges, and for that reason gift-giving is an important way to demonstrate those bonds.
    Each item in the Thanksgiving Address, is that kind of reciprocal communication among relatives: an expression of gratitude for the gifts offered by that person, animal, force, or being that solidifies a two-way relationship.
    Some speakers translate the address as giving thanks <em>for</em> the elements of the world, perhaps to avoid the old Christian accusation of nature-worship, while others have no problem saying they are giving thanks <em>to</em> the beings.
    Ja:no’s Bowen stresses that the address is not a Christian-style prayer because the speaker is not asking these entities for anything the way one would beseech a deity.
    Perhaps <q>gratefully acknowledge</q> or even something like <q>pay respects to</q> would be better translations.
    Either way, followers of the Handsome Lake longhouse religion recognize that humans are one part of a larger world of spiritual beings and forces that are known through elements of the visible world.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationships-songs-overview">
    <h1>Earth Songs as a Practice of Reciprocal Relationships</h1> 
    <p>
    Earth Songs are a central way for traditional Seneca people to establish, celebrate, and renew these relationships according to the spirit of Gano:nyök.
    <aac:TODO note="check gaps with Bill">
    Many dances are explicitly linked to specific beings mentioned in the address, and we might extend the concepts a bit to include others,
    </aac:TODO>
    as in <aac:ref type="table" href="#tab:ganonyok-earth_songs" />.
    If we were to include ceremonial songs like those for seasonal celebrations like the Strawberry Festival or those for healing, this table would easily have an entry for every item in the Thanksgiving Address.
    </p>
    <xi:include href="../tables/ganonyok-earth_songs.xhtml" />
    <p>
    <aac:TODO note="quotes, sources">
    Bill teaches that Robin Dance is meant to give thanks to the robin for returning in the spring.
    Likewise he presents Corn Dance as a way of remembering and being thankful for corn throughout its annual growing cycle.
    Bill’s daughers spoke about Women’s Dance as a way of connecting both with the Earth and with other women in a long line of dancers stretching back to Sky Woman.
    </aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="source">
    (Sky Woman fell from the Sky World and landed on the back of a giant turtle; the muskrat and other animals brought up soil from the sea floor for her and she danced in a counterclockwise circle to spread the soil across the turtle’s back and make the world we know.)
    </aac:TODO>
    </p>
    <p>
    This relational perspective gives a deeper meaning to descriptions of Earth Songs as <q>social dances</q>.
    <aac:TODO note="quote, video">Elder Al George</aac:TODO> describes Earth Songs not only as a form of relaxation, recreation, and simple fun for the community, but also as something that grounds them in who they are and connects them to their ancestors and to the land.
    The community makes the dances and the dances make them.
    They renew relationships to each other and the whole extended, more-than-human family.
    The language of one older New Women’s Shuffle Dance, as paraphrased by singer John Block, says this well:
    </p>
    <blockquote>
      <aac:TODO note="check; video/audio">
      What they are doing up there [in the Sky World]<br />
      we are doing down here.<br />
      It’s good fun<br />
      and it makes our minds as one.
      </aac:TODO>
    </blockquote>
    <p class="continue">
    The circle of dancers on earth mirrors one in the Sky World and joins all together as one community.
    The words are describing social dancing that is <q>good fun</q> rather than a solemn ceremony, but compared to some Western views of dancing it’s still quite a sacred concept.
    </p>
    <p>
    Earth Songs make place in the circle for <em class="seneca">Ha’deögwe’da:geh</em>, all different kinds of people, in a beautiful model of inclusion.<aac:TODO note="photo, from video?">
    At social dances like the intertribal dances at powwows on Haudenosaunee territory, different body types, genders, ages, tribes, clans, and even settlers are invited and welcomed to join.
    </aac:TODO>
    Outside of educational presentations, the normal practice is that there are no spectators for social dancing.
    A social dance involves the active participation of everyone present who is able-bodied enough to move.
    The dances are structured loosely enough that everyone can participate in their own way, from babies being carried to athletic young people to the very elderly who can barely shuffle one foot in front of the other.
    This is why Earth Songs have always been used on the literal and figurative <q>Woods’ Edge Clearing</q> to welcome outsiders into the community and enable exchanges among Native nations and with settlers.
    </p>
    <p>
    The practice of reciprocity is emphasized in Seneca stories about the origins of Earth Songs.
    As Bill tells the story <a class="internal" href="robin.html">Robin Dance</a> was a gift to humans from the robin.
    Likewise certain dances for the corn (though not the social <a class="interal" href="corn.html">Corn Dance</a>) were gifts from the Corn Spirit to enable a healthier relationship after a period of neglect.
    <aac:TODO note="Check with Bill">
    Without sharing the details, Bill also notes that there are also stories about private ceremonial songs in which someone at the margins of society becomes an intermediary to an animal or other being who gives them songs to take back to the human community.
    </aac:TODO>
    In all these cases the animal or spirit knows that humans need a way to relate to it and so give them the song to enable reciprocal relationship.
    </p>
    <p>
    As the animals and beings did for their human family members who would have been helpless without their gifts, likewise did Haudenosaunee people do for the Euro-American guests who came to their territory.
    They adapted the Condolence Council and the woods’-edge protocols to use for treaties.
    <aac:TODO note="sources, link to more info or further discussion here">
    Building on the practical symbols that Peacemaker had used to establish
    good relationships among the Six Nations before colonization,
    Haudenosaunee diplomats created the Two-Row Wampum and the image of the
    Covenant Chain to teach the Dutch and later the English how they could work together.
    </aac:TODO>
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationship-sing">
    <h1>Earth Songs and Reciprocity in Local Communities: The Sing</h1>
    <p>
    Earth Songs build relationships in local Seneca communities whenever they are shared, but the aspect of reciprocity is highlighted especially in the event known as a Sing.
    <aac:TODO note="sources (include podcast)">
    Starting in the early twentieth century mutual-aid groups began holding singing competitions to raise money for the needy in the local community, especially widows.
    </aac:TODO>
    People would gather from all over for joint-aid work like chopping firewood for the winter.
    In the evenings they would relax by sharing <em class="seneca">Ë:sgä:nye:’</em>, New Women’s Shuffle Dance songs.
    In this setting only the songs were shared, not the dance.
    Singing societies developed like the Allegany Singing Society and these groups competed as they shared sets of Women’s Dance songs contributed by their members.
    The songs document and preserve relationships among singers, between teachers and students, and between different towns and territories.
    </p>
    <p>
    More than other types of Earth Songs, <a class="internal" href="womens.html">Ladies’ Dance</a> songs celebrate human experience and community life, as we explain elsewhere.
    Singers make songs expressing everyday experiences.
    Songs shared by the Allegany Singers in a September 2022 recording session included topics of hunting, strawberries, and singing itself.
    <aac:TODO note="examples">Songs</aac:TODO> are shared and remembered from teachers and relatives, making each set of songs a portrait of local community relationships—a way of remembering the community (see <aac:ref type="video" href="vid:memory-community" />).
    In style, too, these songs engage with contemporary culture, making reference to popular songs, major-key sounding implied harmony, and even polyphony.
    </p>
    <p>
    Relationships and reciprocity, then, provide the motivation for a Sing as part of community mutual-aid efforts, and they shape the style and subject matter of the songs shared and the ways they are shared.
    The songs remind the community who they are and where they have been, strengthening reciprocal bonds of friendship and family.
    <aac:TODO note="examples of ladies' dance songs shared between nations?">
    These events also gather people from different territories and Haudenosaunee nations and allow for exchange.
    </aac:TODO>
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationship-intertribal-exchange">
    <h1>Intertribal Exchange in the Earth Songs Repertory</h1>
    <p>
    Just as the repertoire of New Women’s Shuffle Dance songs incorporates layers of contributions from community members over time, the broader Earth Song repertoire also includes songs shared by other, non-Haudenosaunee tribes.
    These shared songs record and preserve the reciprocral relationships among those nations.
    </p>
    <p>
    <aac:TODO note="details, corrections">
    Alligator Dance was a gift from the <a href="https://miccosukee.com/miccosukee-tribe-history/">Miccosukee Nation</a> of Florida.
    </aac:TODO>
    As Bill Crouse tells the story, Haudenosaunee singers at intertribal powwows heard the song and liked it, and the Miccosukee singers gave their permission for them to take it back to their own community.
    <!-- NB this is what would be necessary for settlers -->
    Bill Crouse tells how years later he was dismayed when a boy came up to him at a powwow and asked him if he could record the Alligator Dance on his tape recorder.
    The boy's grandmother related to Bill that since the time when the Senecas learned this song, her people had lost it and no one remembered it any more.
    So the Seneca adoption of the song actually led to it being preserved for its original tribe as well.
    </p>
    <p>
    <aac:TODO note="more details; more on how these dances sound, compare with non-borrowed ones">
    Cherokee Stomp Dance originated with the Haudenosaunee’s more distant Iroquoian-speaking relatives far to the south.
    </aac:TODO>
    </p>
    <p>
    <aac:TODO note="more details, cite article">
    Delaware Stick Dance came to the Haudenosaunee brought by the many Delaware refugees they harbored after the wars and displacement in the East.
    </aac:TODO>
    Like its originators, the dance has become so thoroughly adopted that it is now the traditional closing song in any set of Earth Songs at a social.
    Integrating the song and adopting the people went hand in hand, following the Haudenosaunee concept of <q>extending the rafters</q> to welcome more families into the extended longhouse of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy.
    </p>
    <p>
    Settler scholars have speculated about intercultural origins of other Earth Songs, though their views are not supported by the Seneca oral tradition.
    <aac:TODO note="cite">
    Gertrude Kurath suggested that Standing Quiver’s atypical features might indicate a non-Iroquois origin.
    </aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="cite">Kurath and William Fenton</aac:TODO>developed a theory that the Eagle Dance is <q>an offshoot of the Calumet Dance</q> practiced further west among Anishinaabeg peoples, but we will not discuss it further here because it is a ceremonial dance.
    </p>
    <section id="sec:relationship-sharing_songs">
      <h2>Native Values of Reciprocal Song-Sharing</h2>
      <p>
      The story of Alligator Dance reveals much about Seneca concepts of music and provides a model for those who wish to share their music, especially settlers.
      Singers of both Seneca and Miccosukee nations understood the dance neither as a copyright individual creation nor as something in the public domain.
      Rather, the dance belonged to the nation.
      The dance could be shared as a gift from nation to nation, with the appropriate permission.
      the seneca singers could have simply recorded or memorized the dance and copied it on their own, but they would have viewed that as inappropriate, so they asked for permission.
      Instead of some kind of business transaction, they began a reciprocal relationship that has continued to the present.
      Eventually they were able to give back by re-sharing the song.
      </p>
      <p>
      <aac:TODO note="check with Bill">
      We would ask readers to follow this model in using the materials shared here.
      </aac:TODO>
      Seneca Earth Songs belong to the Seneca Nation, and Seneca singers like Bill Crouse follow community protocols for how, when, and with whom to share them, and for what purpose.
      The stories, recordings, transcriptions, and other information we share here are meant to help create and strengthen relationships between Seneca people and settlers.
      Settlers who would use the songs without involving Seneca people would be not only missing the opportunity to build reciprocal relationships; they would actually be damaging the relationships that exist.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationships-exchange-native">
    <h1>Smoke Dance and Cultural Exchange among Native Nations</h1>
    <p>
    Today powwows on Haudenosaunee territory have become one of the main sites for sharing Earth Songs between Haudenosaunee nations, among Native nations, and with settlers.
    At the Salamanca and Akwesasne powwows, the Grand Entry goes in a counterclockwise circle, reverse of the normal practice elsewhere, and is led by the veterans bearing the flags while the singers sing Earth Songs.
    The normal events of Northern and Southern powwow dance and song are rooted in grass dances of the Western plains, but the powwows on Haudenosaunee territory they are supplemented with the distinctively Iroquois competition category of Smoke Dance.
    </p>
    <p>
    Smoke Dance originated in exhibition shows, in which singers sped up traditional social-dance songs and dancers heightened the traditional moves of War Dance (<em class="seneca">wasa:se’</em>) to create a unique Haudenosaunee version of competitive, showy powwow dancing.
    <!-- TODO check spelling -->
    The high, piercing cries of plains powwow songs and their huge drums, and the spiky, feather plains regalia contrast strikingly with the much more mellifluous tunes and singing style of the Haudenosaunee, coupled usually not with water drum but with a larger frame drum.
    The traditional songs are amped up (literally, on the giant powwow PA systems) but not as much as other powwow music.
    The traditional regalia of Haudenosaunee dancers is also plainer, closer to the body, and more modest than the alternatives.
    At Haudenosaunee-hosted powwows there are separate Smoke Dance events including a Haudenosaunee-centered set of exhibitions called the Woodland Special.
    </p>
    <p>
    Smoke Dance allows Haudenosaunee dancers to present their own distinct heritage in the context of an intertribal gathering.
    A powwow is in one sense a diplomatic event, a kind of congress of Native nations projecting an alternative, anticolonial vision of North America as an indigenous-dominated Turtle Island.
    Smoke Dance builds on earlier traditions of Haudenosaunee diplomacy.
    Earth Songs have been part of the reciprocal relationships among Haudenosaunee nations since the time of Peacemaker.
    <aac:TODO note="evidence?">
    Gatherings of nations for Haudenosaunee councils and treaties all would have included social dances.
    </aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="confirm">
    Most of the Earth Songs are fundamentally the same across the Six Nations in both their melodies and their vocable words.
    </aac:TODO>
    </p>
    <p>
    Distinctions between the six Haudenosaunee nations are downplayed, therefore, to project a sense of pan-Iroquois solidarity.
    <aac:TODO note="image">
    For example, Bill Crouse was the featured singer at the Akwesasne Powwow in September 2023 though it was Mohawk territory.
    </aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="cite">Mohawk elder Doug George</aac:TODO> later told me he hears a big difference between Bill’s Seneca singing style and the smoother style of Mohawk singers like his late wife Joanne Shenandoah, but such distinctions are not crucial in the powwow setting.
    </p>
    <p>
    Apart from powwows, Smoke Dance competitions and exhibitions are regular occurrences in Salamanca and elsewhere, with categories for each gender and age group.
    One memorable moment came in a July 2022 Smoke Dance competition at the Seneca-Iroquois National Museum in Salamanca, when in the middle of the Golden Age Men’s dance, a toddler found his way out into the circle and the elderly dancers included him in their dances.
    Unlike other social dances, Smoke Dance competitions do create a distinction between participants and observers.
    There is a seated audience who applaud at the announcer’s invitation after each dance.
    Smoke Dance competitions often feature substantial cash prizes, which encourages participation and also raises the stakes for the audience.
    </p>
    <p>
    Smoke Dance is one of a few occasions in which Earth Songs are sung in a completely different style and context from their original use.
    <aac:TODO note="confirm, quantify">
    When Bill sings Robin Dance for Smoke Dance (one of his favorites for this purpose) it is at nearly double the normal tempo and follows a different structure of repeats.
    </aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="details, recording">
    Bill has also on occasion repurposed Earth Songs in other settings.
    In summer 2023 he organized an exhibition <q>lacrosse dance</q> which coupled Earth Songs with a choreographed lacrosse exhibition.
    </aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="check, details">
    In this event Bill was following the model of his teacher Avery Jimerson, who repurposed an Earth Song to serve as a <q>Haudenosaunee National Anthem</q>.
    </aac:TODO>
    In these ways Seneca singers continue to use Earth Songs with creativity and flexibility as tools to build reciprocal relationships.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationship-colonial-exchange">
    <h1>Anti-Reciprocal Relationships: Colonizers and Seneca Song</h1>
    <section id="sec:colonial-intro">
      <p>
      The relational use of Earth Songs by the Haudenosaunee contrasts strikingly with the way Euro-American colonizers interacted with them.
      <aac:TODO note="cite Richter, Mohawk etc.">
      Missionaries, diplomats, and settlers consistently failed to understand Native concepts of reciprocity.
      </aac:TODO>
      Settlers either ignored Haudenosaunee music, tried to suppress it and impose their own, or tried to steal it.
      In the face of ignorance and suppression, the Haudenosaunee quietly preserved their own oral traditions; 
      in the face of imposition and theft, they mastered Western music and developed protocols for sharing and withholding information from settlers.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="colonial-erasure">
      <h2>Ignorance and Erasure</h2>
      <p>
      Ignorance and erasure still characterize many settler-Haudenosaunee relationships especially regarding music.
      Little evidence has emerged that any Euro-American people took an interest in Haudenosaunee song before Lewis Henry Morgan.
      Morgan was interested in <aac:TODO note="cite">dance as an embodiment of worldview</aac:TODO> and social structure, not in the details of the movements and not at all in the sounds of the tunes.
      After Morgan no one seriously looked at Haudenosaunee song and dance until <aac:TODO note="cite">William Fenton and Gertrude Kurath’s studies</aac:TODO> in the 1930s–60s.
      Fenton was an anthropologist whose chief fascination was with the Condolence Council as a ritual embodiment of Haudenosaunee history and political organization.
      He made hundreds of field recordings of Bill Crouse’s relatives singing Earth Songs but had little to say about them in his scholarship.
      Kurath’s focus was choreographic, and she made detailed diagrams of Haudenosaunee dance movements and protocols, though her music transcriptions are comparatively fragmentary and imprecise.
      </p>
      <p>
      No scholar has yet given a sense of the complexity, richness, and creativity of Haudenosaunee songs, nor of the intellectual and social accomplishment it is to have preserved them in oral tradition.
      <aac:TODO note="find, cite">Political and social histories of the United States and Canada</aac:TODO> rightly including the Haudenosaunee, but there are no major studies or textbooks on American music that give more than a few words to Haudenosaunee music.
      Even in the Seneca homelands few schoolchildren ever hear Seneca songs unless their schools or their families go to Ganondagan when Bill Crouse is presenting.
      When Bill Crouse taught in my class at the University of Rochester in spring 2021 it was the first time he had been invited to campus to teach.
      </p>
      <p>
      The problem with ignorance and erasure is that it causes settlers to forget that they already have an active relationship with Native people, enshrined in federal treaties.
      Haudenosaunee people might not mind being ignored by settler society, as it could mean less disruption and less need to be concerned about appropriation.
      But when the United States <q>forgets</q> about its treaty obligations, it causes tragedies like the <aac:TODO note="cite">Kinzua Dam</aac:TODO>, when President Kennedy violated the United States very first treaty with a Native nation and flooded one third of the Seneca Nation’s protected lands.
      When we asked Seneca elder Al George why people should know about Earth Songs, <aac:TODO note="actual quote">he said</aac:TODO> that his people needed to know their language and their songs so that settlers couldn’t claim they were no longer Indians and try to invalidate their treaties.
      Keeping Earth Songs alive is thus intensely political and anti-colonial for many Seneca singers.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:colonial-imposition">
      <h2>Imposition and Suppression</h2>
      <p>
      If it would help the colonial cause for settlers to forget about their promises to the indigenous nations, then it would be further their goals even more if they could get the Native people to forget who they are.
      To that end, missionaries and settlers worked to impose their own music on Haudenosaunee people and suppress Native traditions.
      Though the history of colonial European music in Haudenosaunee territory has yet to be researched and is outside our scope, we note that the <aac:TODO note="source-Fenton?">Jesuit missionaries who entered Seneca territory through New France apparently taught converts at Onondaga to play violin and flute and to assist in the Mass liturgy.</aac:TODO>
      <aac:TODO note="sources?">The Anglican missionaries in Mohawk country and the Reformed missionaries in Oneida country</aac:TODO> would have imported their own traditions of hymn singing and psalmody.
      There were early attempts at translating the Bible and the <cite>Book of Common Prayer</cite> into Mohawk, though further research is needed into how these books were produced and used.
      In Seneca territory, the Buffalo Creek missionary <aac:TODO note="sources">Asher Wright</aac:TODO> published a Seneca-language newspaper that often included translations of Scriptures, prayers, and hymns.
      </p>
      <p>
      Such translations helped give rise to Haudenosaunee hymn-singing societies, which are still active in some <aac:TODO note="cite diss.">Seneca communities</aac:TODO> and among the <aac:TODO note="cite">Wisconsin Oneida</aac:TODO>.
      Further research might investigate whether Haudenosaunee people made any contribution to those words, how the translation of Christian concepts adapted existing Haudenosaunee ideas, or how the poetic diction related to Native oral forms.
      It would be fascinating to investigate how indigenous concepts of vocality, rhythm, bodily movement, and other aspects of music transferred into Christian hymn singing, and whether they may have been traditional or new original Native tunes included in these collections in some form (since the sources rarely include music notation).
      </p>
      <p>
      The hymn-singing societies show that despite the missionaries’ attempt to impose European-style music, Haudenosaunee Christians brought their own relational approaches to song and community into the church.
      The practices of the Oneida Hymn Singers, though thoroughly Christian in their hymnological and theological aspects, closely follow the same deeply traditional Haudenosaunee social patterns that were developed through Earth Songs.
      The hymn singers are effectively a mutual-aid society that primarily organizes to sing at funerals and provide hope and comfort to the mourning.
      The singers’ Haudenosaunee ancestors also adapted traditional mourning practices for a new purpose when they converted the Condolence Council into the standard form for Euro-American treaty meetings.
      The same values of community mutual support later gave rise to traditional Sings.
      Haudenosaunee Christians responded to the missionaries’ anti-reciprocal imposition of music by creating a new musical form centered on reciprocity.
      </p>
      <p>
      In other types of music, Haudenosaunee people mastered Western instruments and styles and adopted them as their own.
      <aac:TODO note="cite">Wind bands</aac:TODO> were common across Iroquoia in the nineteenth century.
      Though the music they played was likely the same sort as played by settler bands, it seems likely that their social organization and functions followed distinctive Haudenosaunee patterns, just as the hymn-singing societies have done.
      The Six Nations have produced numerous professional musicians, from early <aac:TODO note="name">boarding school graduates</aac:TODO> to <aac:TODO note="cite">Robbie Robertson</aac:TODO>, one of many Native artists to contribute to the history of rock and roll.
      Haudenosaunee vocalist and composer <aac:TODO note="cite, examples">Joanne Shenandoah</aac:TODO> became one of the most widely known Native American musicians for work that was deeply rooted in her people’s traditional music while embracing New Age, folk, country, and other majority-culture genres.
      </p>
      <p>
      Haudenosaunee musicians’ creativity in mastering and adapting Western music is especially remarkable since generations of Haudenosaunee children were traumatized by boarding schools that tried to eradicate their identities as Native people.
      According to <aac:TODO note="cite interview">Doug George</aac:TODO>, a survivor of the Mohawk Institute on the Six Nations Reserve in Ontario, Canada, the sonic world of boarding schools was a central part of its damaging impact. 
      Quiet was enforced most of the time and children were punished severely for speaking Native languages.
      All night long students lay in bed listening to the sounds of abuse happening as sounds of protest and pain floated up the stairwells to the student dormitory on the top floor.
      The only singing anyone was allowed to hear or do was when children were taken to church on Sundays.
      Very occasionally the radio was played or a record player brought in.
      </p>
      <p>
      Given the central place of Earth Songs, not to mention ceremonial songs, in Haudenosaunee communities, it must have been disorienting and incapacitating for children to be completely removed from that sonic world.
      The regimentation of the body in the <aac:TODO note="read, cite article">boarding schools</aac:TODO> was a key reason dancing was forbidden, and as with the sonic experience of the ears, Haudenosaunee children’s bodies were never used to being completely still.
      Even at ceremonies children would be moving about and playing.
      Haudenosaunee dancing depends on free, natural body movements, not holding of artificial poses.
      Having to sit rigidly still and sing hymns was—by design—a disorienting, identity-negating experience.
      Morgan had said that dance was so important to the Haudenosaunee that should they ever stop dancing they would cease to be Indians, and that was precisely the goal of the boarding schools, to <q>kill the Indian to save the man</q>. 
      Something more opposed to traditional Haudenosaunee values of reciprocity could hardly be devised.
      </p>
      <p>
      For the same reason, the colonial governments banned Native dance and ceremony at <aac:TODO note="facts">various points</aac:TODO>.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:theft">
      <h2>Theft and Appropriation</h2>
      <p>
      Ironically the restrictions on Native musical expression coincided with the rise of interest in recording and preserving Native music among anthropologists and the music scholars who would later call themselves ethnomusicologists.
      Morgan described a core subset of dances but only gave vague descriptions of how the songs sounded, including <aac:TODO note="show">one single measure of music notation</aac:TODO>.
      <aac:TODO note="cite, show">An official in Ontario</aac:TODO> notated a few tunes at the end of the nineteenth century, and these remained the only notated Haudenosaunee music until Gertrude Kurath’s studies in the 1950s.
      Kurath <aac:TODO note="cite">by her own account</aac:TODO> transcribed hundreds of Haudenosaunee song melodies and dance choreographies in her own notation system, based primarily on her first-hand observations at Six Nations, and on audio recordings of Allegany singers by Fenton.
      Of those she only published snippets of songs along with analytical diagrams.
      <aac:TODO note="example (compare); cite Levine">Her notations</aac:TODO>, like so many others of Native music, greatly oversimplified the rhythms and melodic inflections.
      </p>
      <p>
      In addition to these few attempts to notate Haudenosaunee music, settler scholars also <q>captured</q> a large number of Earth Songs in recorded form.
      Fenton published some his recordings through <aac:TODO note="cite, image">Smithsonian Folkways</aac:TODO>, even though he knew that many of them were ceremonial.
      Certainly attitudes have changed toward the more restrictive on the Allegany territory since that time, largely in response to Fenton, but even then the medicinal chants were understood to be efficacious, powerful treatments, not just tunes to be queued up on the turntable.
      Meanwhile <aac:TODO note="list, ref">hundreds of other recordings</aac:TODO> by Fenton, along with others by William Sturtevant, remain in archives, largely unheard and unstudied.
      It is hard to understand why these scholars would go to the effort of making so many recordings but then not actually study or write about their contents.
      </p>
      <p>
      The goal seems to have been simply to acquire and archive these songs.
      Archiving Earth Songs removed them from their relational purpose and made them into artifacts—objects rather than actions.
      The recordings mostly feature only one or two singers accompanying themselves, producing a markedly different effect than a full singing group with instruments.
      Solo singers had to sing both call and response in the antiphonal songs.
      One relational aspect of Fenton’s recordings is that they do often feature introductions from the singers in English and Seneca, and a few include interviews.
      But it many other ways the recordings turn participatory songs into individual performances and remove them from their context in community life.
      While the recordings are become more accessible, partly thanks to the American Philosophical Society’s decision to make portions of its archive available online and to allow tribal members unrestricted access on request, the basic fact remains that for several decades these collections have made the songs much more accessible to settler scholars than to the communities they belong to.
      The situation is all the more lamentable because so few scholars have actually used the collections.
      </p>
      <p>
      Once settlers make indigenous music into an artifact, they feel free to use it however they see fit without regard for its relational origin, as we can observe in settler appropriations of Haudenosaunee Earth Songs.
      Once any settler notates or records Native music it enters into a new life as a commodity in settler culture.
      Especially before CD recordings and then YouTube, it was too hard for settlers to get access to the oral tradition, so they relied on what they could find in books.
      The first full notation of Haudenosaunee songs, <aac:TODO note="details, cite">in the Ontario report by a government official in the late nineteenth century,</aac:TODO> made it possible for others to adapt the songs without having to learn them within the traditional context of Haudenosaunee oral teaching.
      A composer arranged a portion of <cite>Shake the Bush</cite> into a <aac:TODO note="details, cite">Victorian pseudo-Indian parlor song</aac:TODO>.
      The arrangements kept only the basic outline of pitches and rhythmic proportions and otherwise transformed the songs into nineteenth-century American sentimental songs with full piano accompaniment and invented pseudo-Native words by a white author.
      The original songs celebrate the human community’s relationship with the Earth and its plants using vocables whose only meaning is singing itself, but that did not fit settler‘s conceptions of Indian songs, which were supposed to be nostalgic laments about having to depart to the far West or even further, to the Happy Hunting Grounds in the sky.
      In other words, in a classic pattern, the authentic Indian song was <q>not Indian enough</q> for a white audience.
      The resulting faux-Indian creation might as well be <cite>On the Banks of the Wabash</cite> or any other sentimental ballad of the time, so thoroughly has it been removed from its origin.
      </p>
      <p>
      Recordings later came to serve a similar purpose—facilitating white appropriations by people without access to the original sources.
      In 1945 <aac:TODO note="details">Colin McPhee (1900–1964) made an orchestral arrangement of <cite>Four Iroquois Dances</cite> from the recordings Fenton published with Smithsonian Folkways, <cite>Songs from the Iroquois Longhouse</cite>.</aac:TODO>
      Only one of the dances is an Earth Song—Corn Dance; two of the others are ceremonial and no longer shared with outsiders (Eagle Dance and a medicine dance).
      In his arrangement of Corn Dance, McPhee only used the first minute of the recording, which is a bit like quoting only the first sentence of a Shakespeare play.
      Rather than draw on any of the fascinating musical features of the Corn Dance songs, the composer treats the piece as an exercise in orchestral tone color.
      The author gives no indication of any relationship to the Senecas, even a mental one, or even any relationship to corn (or dancing!).
      Without relationship, there can be no reciprocity, and indeed
      it seems safe to assume that not a single Seneca person is even aware
      that this adaptation exists.
      <aac:TODO note="check">Bill affirms</aac:TODO> that Seneca faithkeepers would certainly not approve any performance of these unfaithful adaptations that include restricted songs, and which present Seneca songs in the typically all-white atmosphere of the concert hall without requiring the involvement of any actual Seneca people.
      Moreover, McPhee borrows the label <q>Iroquois</q> from Fenton for these songs, disregarding the distinct Seneca origin of these recordings made at Coldspring Longhouse on the Allegeny Territory (the portion now flooded by the Kinzua Dam).
      </p>
      <p>
      These appropriations exemplify the patterns of superficial white uses of second- and third-hand verisons of Native music without regard for their context and original significance.
      They are attempts to extract the raw ore from native mines with no effrot to actually connect with people.
      They force Native music into a settler aesthetic framework.
      The arrangements imply that the original was not sufficient on its one, but only raw material for <q>real</q> music made by a Western composer, as <aac:TODO note="cite">Dylan Robinson</aac:TODO> has argued.
      </p>
      <p>
      Haudenosaunee people have escaped the worst examples of this pattern by not sharing their music more widely.
      They have restricted access to outsiders and strongly discouraged even Seneca people from putting their songs and their language into a fixed Western-style form that could be taken beyond Haudenosaunee control.
      </p>
      <p>
      Meanwhile they have made the best of the situation by using settler scholar’s recordings and recording technology as an aid to their own oral traditions.
      Archival recordings that were not supposed to leave the archive have had a way of showing up on the reservation and then being copied widely.
      The Allegany Singers recorded two versions of <aac:TODO note="link">Standing Quiver</aac:TODO> in September 2022, one led by Bill Crouse and based on continuous oral tradition, and the other led by Jake George and based on recordings that captured an earlier version of the tradition.
      <aac:TODO note="Ok to share? details?">Bill recounted</aac:TODO> the efforts over years to preserve a particular set of ceremonial songs where living singers could only remember a portion of the original song list.
      But when previously unknown archival recordings of Bill’s teachers were discovered they were able to recover all but the last of the original set of songs.
      </p>
      <p>
      Settler approaches to Haudenosaunee music in general were anti-reciprocal in that they either ignored Haudenosaunee people, took what they wanted and used it for their own purposes without returning anything, or actively did harm to them by restricting their traditional expressions and attempting to re-educate them.
      In response, the Haudenosaunee have worked to keep their songs within the relational, communal context of their oral tradition and have continued to use them for their original relational purpose.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:relationship-forward">
    <h1>The Woods’ Edge Clearing and the Way Forward</h1>
    <section id="sec:relationship-forward-intro">
      <p>
      Seneca people continue to use Earth Songs to build reciprocal relationships.
      Those relationships include their links to Mother Earth and her plants, animals, and natural forces, as well as the family and social relationships that make up the Seneca Nation and the Haudenosaunee Confederacy.
      They also extend to their connections to their non-Native neighbors.
      If settlers can listen to Earth Songs and understand the values of relationship and reciprocity that animate them, then new kinds of relationships may be able to grow between settlers and Natives in Seneca territory, rooted in the protocols the Haudenosaunee originally established for relating with Euro-Americans at <q>the edge of the woods</q>.
      </p>
      <p>
      In Seneca villages before contact and well into the colonial period, the <aac:TODO note="citations">woods’-edge clearing</aac:TODO> was the meeting place of local insiders and visiting outsiders.
      Visitors sang as they approached a village, and village residents began preparing for their meeting when they could hear them singing through the woods.
      They met at the edge of the woods and the locals greeted their visitors with <aac:TODO note="cite, example">a protocol</aac:TODO> based on the ceremonies for condoling the grieving, which included songs.
      They ritually wiped the tears from their eyes, opened their ears, and cleared the block in their throats caused by the griefs and hardships of the journey.
      This prepared both parties to receive each other and enter into relationship with a Good Mind.
      Once the guests were welcomed into the community, the outsiders would often be invited to participate in a community social dance in the evening.
      Starting with Standing Quiver, the lead singer would recruit the other singers and in turn draw the whole village into the dance.
      The songs and dances solidified the reciprocal connections among everyone present.
      </p>
      <p>
      Earth Songs have continued that relational function up to the present day.
      Today the woods’ edge is found not only at the edge of a city or a reservation boundary, but at the meeting place of Seneca people following traditional and not-so-traditional Seneca lifestyles and religious practice, those living on and off territory, as well as indigenous and non-indigenous people.
      It is a meeting place for past and present, history and tradition.
      A liminal (threshold) space where old relationships can be strengthened and new relationships formed.
      </p>
      <p>
      The Seneca Arts and Culture Center at Ganondagan State Historic Site was built around the concept of the Woods’ Edge Protocol.
      The walkway up to the center from the parking lot takes visitors through the stages of the woods’ edge greeting.
      Settlers and people of all kinds are welcome to the many free events at Ganondagan like the Winter Indigenous Arts Festival.
      When Bill Crouse and his group present Earth Songs there, they are continuing the traditions of using these songs to create reciprocal relationships.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:relationship-bill_shows">
      <h2>Bill Crouse’s Earth Song Presentations</h2>
      <p>
      Bill and others use the songs to educate settlers not only about Seneca music but about worldview and values, care for the Earth, and history.
      Bill’s presentations give settlers a way to connect with Seneca people and begin a reciprocal relationship with them.
      His events call on everyone to participate in the Native style; they are not for bystanders or objective scholarly observers.
      </p>
      <p>
      For this settler (Andrew), Earth Songs are invitingly simple to dance but also surprisingly challenging and physically taxing to keep up.
      Settlers tend to be at first flattered and then humbled by the experience of dancing Earth Songs.
      They emerge from the last dance a little or a lot sweaty, smiling, with new relationships to their neighbors, and new friends in Bill and his group.
      </p>
      <!-- describe typical (or specific) show of Bill
        - Seneca language intro
        - order, events
        - common themes: Mother Earth, we are still here
        - distinct values that come through: celebration of people of all ages and types; Native artistry and excellence including regalia
        - diplomatic; making no claim on others - this is what we do, this is what is important to us
      -->
      <p>
      <aac:TODO note="complete video?">The 2023 Indigenous Peoples’ Day</aac:TODO>
      presentation by Bill Crouse and the Allegany River Indian Singers and
      Dancers at Genesee Valley Park in Rochester exemplified Bill’s typical
      program and themes.
      Bill began as he always does by introducing himself in Seneca and then in English.
      After giving a basic introduction to his group, the Seneca Nation, and Earth Songs, he told a simple version of the story of Standing Quiver Dance and then led his group dancing in a counterclockwise circle around the park shelter.
      He invited everyone to follow them and participate in the dance and around forty people did join their line, while as many watched from the side.
      Among other dances, Bill responded to recent unseasonably cold weather by including the North Dance, dedicated to the cold North Wind.
      In the Corn Dance, someone brought their retriever along with them in the line, prompting Bill to conclude by <aac:TODO note="actual quote">remarking</aac:TODO>, <q>I think that is the first time I ever saw a dog do Corn Dance,</q> and, to groans, <q>He must be a corn dog!</q>
      Bill took time to introduce each member of the group and explained their regalia, having first the women and then the men showcase their beautiful, handmade clothes and moccasins.
      The show included a presentational version of a Smoke Dance contest, with dancers of each gender and age group showing off their finest moves, with the youngest coming last and winning onlookers’ hearts.
      In accord with typical social-dance protocols, the final dance was Delaware Stick Dance.
      </p>
      <p>
      Bill knows how to entertain a crowd of settlers, and his presentations are extremely diplomatic with regard to politics.
      This is partly because he was raised to believe that faithkeepers were not supposed to be partisan, something he said his mother continually reminds him.
      But every presentation still includes the themes of Seneca sovereignty, history, survival, and excellence.
      Bill always reminds listeners that the Seneca Nation is a living community with ancient roots deeply connected to their specific land with its creatures and its seasons.
      He stresses the longevity of their oral traditions as evidence that <q>we’re still here</q>.
      And he celebrates excellence by showcasing Seneca virtuosity in dance, singing, and regalia, always emphasizing that even his youngest children are learning these arts and well on their way to mastery.
      He also demonstrates a corny, irreverant Native humor that is so characteristic of American indigenous people despite being still so little recognized among non-Natives.
      Bill’s approach is to counter stereotypes not through direct confrontation but by showing people what Seneca people and their traditions are really like.
      He knows that there will be attendees who only think of Indians in the past tense, and so while he does stress the continuity of their traditions, he also will say <q>I should point out that we don’t dress like this every day</q> for the benefit of hearers like the woman who came up to him after a show at Ganondagan and asked how well the corn-husk outer moccasins she’d seen in the museum worked in the snow.
      <q>I wouldn’t know,</q> he told her.
      <q>Most of the time I just wear my boots.</q>
      Bill’s shows create a woods’-edge clearing, and settlers may enter with ignorance or stereotypes will leave with the beginnings of a relationship with real Seneca people.
      The songs and dances serve as a gift from the Senecas back to settlers, providing a way for to enter into a healthy, mutually beneficial relationship.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:caneadea">
      <h2>Sharing the Land in Caneadea</h2>
      <p>
      The capacity of Earth Songs to build reciprocal relationships was demonstrated vividly in an important intercultural and diplomatic event in Caneadea, New York, in July 2023.
      The town government of Caneadea reached out to the Seneca Nation government and asked how they could formally establish friendship—something that had never happened before.
      <aac:TODO note="date, details">After a year-long process of collaborative planning their efforts culminated in the Canedea Field Day.</aac:TODO>
      </p>
      <p>
      <aac:TODO note="details">Caneadea has been the site of one of the Seneca Nation’s reservations</aac:TODO>, one of the last ones they lost before ending up with just the territories they occupy now.
      <aac:TODO note="images, video">In a large field</aac:TODO> on the west bank of the Genesee River that was part of that reservation, on a hot day in midsummer, there was a formal ceremony followed by social dancing and a lacrosse demonstration game.
      Vendors and exhibitors from the Seneca Nation set up tents all across the field.
      <aac:TODO note="details">The ceremony</aac:TODO> included speeches by Caneadea and Seneca Nation officials including SNI president Ricky Armstrong.
      Gifts were exchanged that had been custom-made for this occasion.
      </p>
      <p>
      <aac:TODO note="details">Bill sang the <q>Haudenosaunee anthem</q> created by his great-grandfather as they raised the Seneca Nation flag next to a town flag.</aac:TODO>
      Notably, they did not fly a New York State flag, the US flag, or the Haudenosaunee Hiawatha-belt flag, as the agreement of friendship was only between the town of Caneadea and the Seneca Nation of Indians.
      There was a humility and a specificity to that that reflected the relational understanding on both sides.
      This was certainly a political event but it was very specific to the communities involved.
      </p>
      <p>
      A mixed but largely white crowd listened to the speeches and many joined in the social dancing.
      Bill, Al George, and Jacob Dowdy sang as Bill’s group (mostly consisting of his extended family) danced.
      <aac:TODO note="details">The first dance was a Friendship Dance followed by a typical social set starting with Standing Quiver and including New Women’s Shuffle Dance.</aac:TODO>
      </p>
      <p>
      <aac:TODO note="Bill’s reflections">I (Andrew) was struck</aac:TODO> by how much of the language used in the speeces stretched back to eighteenth-century treaty sessions—the Covenant Chain, the Tree of Peace, and other metaphors were foundational.
      Likewise the whole event, held in a literal woods’ edge clearing, seemed almost to reverse the old ceremony in that it was not Seneca people welcoming outsiders to their village but settlers welcoming Senecas back to their own land, now as guests.
      One YouTube commenter titled the day, <q>Caneadea—The Return</q>.
      </p>
      <p>
      But one could also read it the other way.
      Here as in the eighteenth century, the settlers had few protocols that would suffice.
      The Senecas assumed the main burden of ceremony.
      Two hundred years later somehow it was still the Senecas creating a dance circle and inviting whites to join in friendship, welcoming settlers to step onto familiar land with a new understanding—that the settlers had been the guests all along.
      Senecas understood land through the worldview articulated by the Thanksgiving Address, not as an object to be owned or a set of privileges to be bestowed, but as a web of relationships to living beings.
      Others could become part of that web of relationships, even settlers.
      They could share the land and its resources for the same reason we all must share our friends: we are grateful for their friendship but we do not have the right to limit who else they are friends with.
      <aac:TODO note="Bill's thoughts?">In my (Andrew’s) view,</aac:TODO> since this land was guaranteed to the Senecas by the 1794 Treaty of Canandaigua, which has not been supplanted by another legally ratified treaty, it would be better for the town of Caneadea to actually give this land back to the Seneca Nation, and only then work together to figure out how the Senecas could share the land with <em>them</em>.
      But establishing friendship and sharing the land, even for one day a year, are at least good steps on the path forward.
      That no other city in the region has yet made such a step indicates how far settlers have to go.
      </p>
      <p>
      In this event all three of this project’s dialectic themes come together.
      <em>Earth and land</em> define not just Mother Earth or the Genesee valley in themselves, but reciprocal relationships with <q><em>Our</em> Mother the Earth</q> through a specific place.
      <q>The Creator’s Game</q>, lacrosse, was played probably on that very field in Caneadea, for centuries before <q>the return</q> last July.
      The Fish Dance songs sung on that day were made to honor the same fish swimming in the Genesee only a few hundred yards away.
      </p>
      <p>
      <em>History and tradition</em> are at play here because of the way traditional ceremonies, metaphors, songs, and dances, were used to shape a historic event and respond to the history of that place.
      Several of Bill’s choices were rooted in history: the flag song, Friendship Dance, Standing Quiver.
      But the whole event responded to history by creating a new tradition: this event is intended to recur annually.
      The answer to a cycle of betrayal and abuse is a new cycle of trust and friendship.
      People forget that places are defined by how we use them, and we can therefore start using them differently.
      </p>
    </section>
    <!-- TODO START -->
    <section id="sec:relationship-picturing">
      <h2>Three Ways of Picturing Settler–Indigenous Relationships</h2>
      <section id="sec:relationship-picturing-intro">
        <p>
        Among several goals, we hope that this project will help settlers develop relationships with indigenous people through this introduction to Seneca cultural heritage and the values that it embodies.
        We have spoken about some of the ways that settlers in the past have failed to understand the importance of relationships and so have caused harm in their treatment of Native music.
        We want to conclude by pointing both settlers and indigenous readers to three ways of picturing healthy relationships between their communities.
        These ways were developed by the Haudenosaunee through centuries of interacting with Euro-Americans and still provide helpful ways of thinking about reciprocity.
        They are the Two-Row Wampum, the Covenant Chain, and the Dance Circle.
        The first two are increasingly well known among students of Native American and colonial history, but merit a summary here because they should inform the way we think about learning and sharing music.
        To these we add the image of dance, which deserves more recognition in discussions of Native–settler relations.
        </p>
      </section>
      <section id="sec:relationship-two_row">
        <h3>The Two-Row Wampum</h3>
        <p>
        <aac:TODO note="image">The Two-Row Wampum</aac:TODO> or <aac:TODO note="spelling"><em class="seneca">Gaswë:ta’</em></aac:TODO> was originally a treaty with the Dutch in the seventeenth century.
        Wampum beads were made from <aac:TODO note="check">clam</aac:TODO> shells and woven into strings or belts that served as mnemonic devices used to communicate messages and make agreements.
        The belt encoded a message or an agreement through simple symbols.
        All the people involved in the communication had to remember the message and preserve it in their own oral traditions; the belt would only remind them.
        </p>
        <p>
        This particular belt had two rows of dark wampum beads down the center with a narrow row of white beads between.
        <aac:TODO note="source, quotes">The concept</aac:TODO> was that the Haudenosaunee and the Dutch were travelling down the river together, the Dutch in their ships and the Native people in their canoes.
        They could both share the river provided that the Dutch did not try to get into the canoes and the Haudenosaunee did not interfere with the ships.
        It was an image of peaceful coexistence, sharing space and natural resources, but also leaving each other be, according to the same ideal for how Native nations were supposed to relate to each other.
        It implied respect and cooperation but also healthy distance.
        </p>
        <p>
        Not only is the Two-Row Wampum a way of remembering a relational agreement of the past; it is also a tool for thinking about settler–Native relationships today.
        <aac:TODO note="name">A Haudenosaunee scholar</aac:TODO> presented a whole paper at the 2023 Conference on Iroquois Research just on the three rows of white beads in the middle of the Two-Row.
        Did they only represent distance, like a Demilitarized Zone between the two communities?
        Or did they represent a more active relationship of peace and cooperation?
        She actually got grant funding to take the Two-Row message almost literally, by going on a canoe trek with a settler friend and writing about what they learned in a shared experience where they had to cooperate closely or be capsized.
        </p>
        <p>
        The Two-Row Wampum makes clear that Native people sought ways from the beginning to live in mutually beneficial ways with the European newcomers.
        <q>Our roads have always been open to you</q>, Haudenosaunee speakers said in <aac:TODO note="source">multiple treaty negotiations</aac:TODO>.
        There was plenty of land to spare, which the Haudenosaunee did not claim to own anyway.
        There was an assumption both of reciprocity and of respect for differing ways of life.
        </p>
        <p>
        Many Native people today, despite all the intervening history, still cultivate this kind of open, sharing attitude.
        The Allegany Territory has no border checkpoints or customs.
        All I (Andrew) had to do to begin learning the Seneca language was sign up for a free online course through the Nation’s Language Department.
        Bill is coauthoring this project with the support of his community, though there will always be differing attitudes about how much to share.
        That openness comes with an expectation of reciprocity, that the settler with whom knowledge is shared will be responsible for that knowledge and use it for the community’s benefit.
        </p>
        <p>
        The Two-Row might also be read to mean something like <q>separate but equal</q> or <q>stay in your lane</q>, and some settlers still need to hear that.
        There are situations where Native people would prefer to just be left alone.
        Native people don’t need help from settlers because of a supposed deficit inherent in their biology or culture.
        The problems well-meaning settlers want to help with—poverty, addiction, language and culture loss—are ones that settlers created.
        Native nations would not need grant funds or studies from linguists for language revitalization if generations of forced re-education in abusive boarding schools had not nearly driven the language extinct.
        They would not need economic aid if the US and Canada had not taken away the land that was their economic base.
        There would be no need for digital-humanities projects like this one to document oral tradition if all the conditions that allowed oral tradition to work effectively for thousands of years had not been so violently disturbed.
        Native people are perfectly capable of determining their own needs and developing ways to address them, and when they are able to define their own space the results are beautiful to behold, as anyone can see at a powwwow.
        There you see a glimpse of a modern America that is a confederation of hundreds of ancient but living and thriving indigenous nations—plus a few immigrant guests living in their midst, sharing the land.
        </p>
        <p>
        On the other hand, the Two-Row is not a cop-out for settlers who just don’t want to do the work or take the risks required to remedy their relationship with Native people.
        In music schools and concert halls, a much greater risk than assimilationism is segregation, and greater than that is the danger of pure erasure.
        But the Two-Row Wampum challenges settler institutions to rethink how they approach their goals of diversity, equity, and inclusion with respect to Native people, because Native nations are not necessarily looking for inclusion.
        Instead of programming music by a white composer that <q>integrates</q> Native elements, or even programming music by a Native composer that conforms to Classical canons and can be played on European instruments according to European aesthetics, the leaders of these institutions might consider whether it would be better simply to create space on their stage for Native performers to present according to their own agenda; or perhaps to dedicate some of their funding to support the work of Native cultural revitalizers even if the results can’t be immediately showcased on stage.
        Settler scholars who are concerned about watering down the canon by including Native American music in their courses might consider the alternative: funding an entire course of study in the local Native nation’s music, taught by local Native teachers compensated at a rate on par with the settler faculty (even if they don’t have PhDs), and making it required for all music majors <em>in addition</em> to the content focused on the European canon.
        University music schools and departments could be organizing Native-run indigenous music and arts festivals to be held annually in the nicest building on campus and promoted heavily to the whole community.
        Let the settler institution handle the finances and logistics, since the space and the money originated with Native land anyway; let the Native community take the lead on the actual content presented.
        That kind of initiative would embody the Two-Row Wampum as a cooperative gesture that shares resources but also allows for cultural difference.
        </p>
        <!-- TODO? (here or below?) two-row aspects in my collaboration with Bill, knowing who each of us are and what we want even when it’s different, finding mutual benefit -->
      </section>
      <section id="sec:relationship-covenant_chain">
        <h3>The Covenant Chain</h3>
        <!-- TODO START -->
      </section>
      <section id="sec:relationship-dance">
        <h3>The Dance Circle</h3>
        <p>
        Seneca Earth Songs provide a third image of settler-Native relationships in addition to the Two Row wampum and the Covenant Chain: the circle of dance.
        Where the Two-Row emphasizes separateness but also sharing; the Covenant Chain emphasizes dependency, legal bonds, and reciprocal mutual obligation; the Friendship Dance emphasizes movement, energy, embodiment—sharing the same space, dancing on the same Earth, moving forward but also staying in a traditional circle, connected to ancient, ongoing, eternal patterns of seasons.
        Hence, <q>the Return</q>: another turn around the same circle of settler-Native relationships, an ongoing dance now centuries old, but somehow just beginning.
        </p>
      </section>
    </section>
    <!-- way forward: two row, covenant chain -->
    <section id="sec:relationship-our_project">
      <h2>The Relational Goals of This Project</h2>
      <p>
      The <cite>Songs at the Woods’ Edge</cite> project is explicitly intended to contribute to reciprocal relationships between Seneca people like Bill and their settler guests like Andrew.
      Much as we are concerned about harmful appropriations, we are more worried about erasure and ignorance.
      Better to make good, authentic material available with proper context than to allow people to continue thinking Haudenosaunee people exist only in history books, if that.
      </p>
      <p>
      For me (Andrew) this project provides a way to polish the Covenant Chain of friendship that my own ancenstors passed on to me, whether they knew it or not.
      What I initially envisioned as a traditional Western research project, where I extract sources from the field like minerals and then refine them into a scholarly product, turned into something much more interesting, rewarding, challenging, and unpredictable—a relationship.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>
</article>
