<!-- Robin Dance
  2023/06 drafted
-->
<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="article:robin">
  <section id="sec:robin-intro">
    <p>
    Robin Dance can be sung any time, but is most closely associated with the start of spring.
    The song honors the robin as a harbinger of spring after the long winter: as Bill says, <q>We’re honoring the robin, so we welcome it back</q>
    (<aac:ref  type="audio" href="#aud:robin-crouse-intro" />).
    </p>
    <figure data-medium="web" class="image" id="img:robin">
      <iframe class="manual-size" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/397866701/embed" height="511" width="640"></iframe>
      <figCaption><em class="seneca">Jö:yaik</em>, the American robin (in Lenape territory, New York, NY, photograph by Dimitris Salas, courtesy Cornell Ornithology Labs, Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <p>
    The Robin Dance songs seem to imitate the song of the <em class="seneca">jö:yaik</em> (American robin), while the side-to-side dance suggests the bird’s hopping movements.
    </p>
    <figure class="audio" id="aud:robin-crouse-intro">
      <audio>
        <source src="media/robin-intro-crouse-ur-2023.mp3" type="audio/mp3" />
      </audio>
      <figCaption>
        Bill Crouse introduces Robin Dance to students at the University of Rochester, April 11, 2023
      </figCaption>
    </figure>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-coldspring">
      <aac:youtube key="LOTbAImVAkQ" />
      <figCaption><em class="seneca">Jö:yaik oënö’</em>, Bill Crouse and the Allegany Singers (John Block, lead), Coldspring Cookhouse, Allegany Territory of the Seneca Nation of Indians, September 2022</figCaption>
    </figure>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:robin-story">
    <h1>Story</h1>
    <p>
    According to Seneca oral tradition, the Robin Dance was a gift to the people from the robin, and the robin was originally a human boy.
    That boy went out into the woods with his uncle on a vision quest, and while he was fasting and waiting for a vision, he grew ill and began to waste away.
    His uncle found him on the point of death, with his chest painted red, but the boy begged to wait another day.
    When the uncle returned the last time, he found a bird who told him,
    <q>I am your nephew. I am <em class="seneca">jö:yaik</em>,</q> the robin, and from now on he would be the sign that spring was returning.
    He gave the people his songs as a way of honoring him and the promise of spring.
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:crouse-robin-story">
      <aac:youtube key="1h-JThdY18o" />
      <figCaption>Bill Crouse tells the origin of <em class="seneca">Jö:yaik Oënö’</em>, at Allegany State Park overlooking <em class="seneca">Ohi:yo’</em> (the Allegany Territory of the Seneca Nation)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <p>
    The Seneca Robin Dance is evidence of a long, close relationship between humans and robins in this region, which Western science confirms.
    The American robin (<em class="latin">Turdus migratorius</em>) already lived all across North America when humans first arrived, but robins seem to have lived close by humans since
    <aac:citation key="CornellBirds:Robin" />.
    They prefer to hunt in grassy, open areas with plenty of sunlight, and so they thrive in human-settled landscapes or at the <q>woods’ edge</q>.
    In recent times scientists robin populations have been documented to expand following patterns of human settlement.
    Robins show awareness of people and their habits: city robins allow people to come much closer to them than their country cousins do, and they are less frightened of people walking on paths without looking at them, possibly because they have learned the predictable pattern that people tend to stay on paths.
    Human behavior shapes robin behavior: robins sing earlier in the morning when there is more light pollution.
    <!-- TODO citations -->
    </p>
    <p>
    Robins’ close proximity to humans, their easily identifiable song, and their seasonal return, make them one of the better-known birds even to urban settlers who do not otherwise pay much attention to birds.
    <q>Because the species is so widespread, virtually all North Americans hear, and are warmed by, the lovely melody of the robin during the spring and summer, although many people do not recognize its song as such.
    Those who do, however, widely regard the early migrating American robin to be  a longed-for harbinger of springtime and warmer weather, because this bird often arrives at the northern parts of its range and sings while there is still snow on the ground</q>
    <aac:citation key="GaleScience:Robins" />.
<!-- TODO
  - folkloric explanations of red breast
  - significance of vision/fasting/death in story? 
  - giving thanks for birds in Ganonyok
-->
    The difference between the common folkloric ideas of robins and the Seneca Robin Dance is that Seneca people and their ancestors have lived side-by-side with this species of bird in this territory for thousands of years, and the song was developed and preserved through oral tradition as a sign of their close relationship.
    </p>
    <!--
    <figure class="image" id="img:robin-family">
      <iframe class="manual-size" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/61179031/embed" height="511" width="640"></iframe>
      <figCaption>A cardinal feeds its babies a worm (photo by Terence Zahner, courtesy Cornell Ornithology Labs, Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    -->
  </section>
  <section id="sec:robin-songs">
    <h1>Songs</h1>
    <p>
    The Robin Dance songs seem closely related to the song of the actual bird.
    Robin songs feature three or more repeated chirrups at a certain pace,
    about 100 beats per minute
    (<aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:robin-song" />).
    The first two chirrups stay fairly constant in timing and pitch across the sung.
    When robins vary the song it is usually in the <q>syllables</q> after that (discrete vocalizations that are part of a larger song), so that for example there might be four vocalizations and the last one would have a different type of contour.
    </p>
    <!-- TODO 
      - different types of robin songs? 
      - better description 
    -->
    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-song">
      <iframe class="manual-size" height="300" width="640" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/230039991/embed"></iframe>
      <figCaption>Song of an American robin in the Conewango Swamp Wildlife Management Area, between the Cattaraugus and Allegany Territories of the Seneca Nation, near Randolph, NY (recorded by Andrew Spencer, courtesy of the Cornell Ornithology Lab, Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <p>
    The Seneca dance songs also being with a repeated high-pitch call, <em>Yoh hoh yo:h</em>, at a similar pace to the bird’s, and in both of the Allegany Singers’ recordings, settles into a steady beat at 100 beats per minute
    (<aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:robin-coldspring" />
    <aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:robin-score"> and </aac:ref>).
    The rest of the Seneca melody is built of short, repetitive phrases of just a few notes each.
    That these phrases come after the high-pitch call may imitate the pattern in which the robin’s song variations happen after the first three chirrups.
    Moreover, the different Robin Dance songs are really variations on one song melody with different vocable lyrics; this pattern is also like bird songs.
    <!-- TODO 
      - more detail 
      - pitch collection
    -->
    While this melody does seem like an imitation of the bird’s song, it could also be inspired by the robin’s way of moving, in which it will pause while listening and looking for worms, then hop and run a short distance.
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-score">
      <aac:youtube key="l6JuWRqUqC8" />
      <figCaption>Transcription of <em class="seneca">Jö:yaik Oënö’</em> by Andrew Cashner, as recorded by the Allegany Singers, Louis Castellano, lead (2002)</figCaption>
    </figure>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:robin-movements">
    <h1>Movements</h1>
    <p>
    In the Robin Dance participants line up with all the men first followed by the women and move in a counterclockwise circle.
    First dancers face the center and shuffle sideways to their right, stepping first with the right foot then in the next step bringing the left foot over next to it.
    At the first repeat of each song (<q>Yo ho yo...</q>) the dancers turn around to face outwards, and then continue the same motions but reversed: now they step to their left with their left foot and bring the right foot next to it.
    </p>
    <p>
    These motions seem to imitate the distinctive hopping and running of the American robin
    (<aac:ref type="video" href="#vid:robin-hopping" />).
<!-- 
      - significance of gender division? (cf. robin couples seen in spring, significance of spring/mating?)
      - similarities with other animal-related songs? or season-related ones?
    -->
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-hopping">
      <iframe class="manual-size" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/226292131/embed" height="502" width="640"></iframe>
      <figCaption>Robin hopping and pecking for worms at the Cornell Ornithology Lab in Tompkins, NY (Haudenosaunee–Cayuga territory, courtesy Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
      </section>
</article>
 
