<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!-- 
  Philip Stockin, Caneadea Town Supervisor Emeritus
  Address at Caneadea Field Day 2024 (2nd annual) 
-->
<blockquote xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
            xmlns:aac="http://www.senecasongs.earth"
            id="quote:Stockin">
  <p>
  <!--
  Good afternoon.
  I’m still Caneadea’s Supervisor Emeritus.
  -->
  It’s my privilege and honor to be part of this historic gathering once again, the second annual Seneca Caneadea field day.
  We welcome each of you from near and far.
  I will not give an exhaustive list here but I know there are folks with us this afternoon from California, Indiana, Texas, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York City, and many hills and valleys of western New York.
  Thank you for sharing this special day with us and a very warm and special welcome to our friends from the Seneca Nation of Indians.
  </p>
  <p>
  Last year I mentioned that I grew up right across Route 19 from here and spent many hours exploring this area being fully aware that this was Seneca land.
  Indeed the history of the Seneca nation here in the Genesee Valley is deeply woven into the fabric of this place and we are honored today to welcome members of the Seneca nation back to their ancestral land while also celebrating our growing friendship for a second year.
  When nurturing a friendship the Senecas compare it to polishing a chain and not letting it become rusty.
  May today’s events in a park along the banks of the beautiful Genesee River polish that chain that connects us.
  </p>
  <p>
  We trust that today will be an opportunity to listen to learn and a chance to gain new appreciation for the timeless traditions and culture of our Seneca neighbors.
  In a moment when politics and people are so polarized, our hope is that this event continues to serve as a positive model of renewed friendship, bringing people together in a spirit of respect and honor.
  So on behalf of the town of Caneadea we welcome you to this special place where the heavens rest upon the earth.
  <!--
  Thank you.
  -->
  </p>
</blockquote>
