<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<div xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
     xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth">
  <p>
  Whenever we gather in our territory we always start off by offering these words that we call <em class="seneca">Ganö:nyök</em>.
  We also refer to this as <em class="seneca">Öëndöh Gaewadehgöh</em>, these are the Words that Come before Everything Else.
  And the reason our people have always used this this opening is because it puts our minds as one and it reminds us of what is really important.
  And I’m pleased to say that this opening is used for ceremonies, and gatherings on our territory as well as even tribal council starts off with being of one mind, and all of our art and all of our celebration waits until we get this one mind. 
  </p>
  <p>
  And what I’m going to do is, I’m going to say a brief version of this opening in <em class="senea">Onöndowa’ga:’</em>, in the Seneca language and then I’ll translate it into a foreign language—English.
  So bear with me as we have this opening at this very beautiful site.
  </p>
  <p>
  [Gives address in Seneca]
  </p>
  <p>
  Now with that opening I started off by giving thanks for the earth itself and I said that we are here, we are gathering and we want to acknowledge <strong>all the people</strong>, that all the people from all across all the four corners of this world are here and that we need to be of one mind.  
  And I said that we’re thankful and we give honor and respect to all the people all over the world.
  </p>
  <p>
  Then I said the first thing that he created was <strong>Our Mother the Earth</strong>.
  It’s a place for us to rest our feet.
  And that we are of one mind at this time in giving thanks to our Mother the Earth.
  </p>
  <p>
  I said next that it was intended by the Creator that when we wake up in the morning that we drink good <strong>water</strong> and that we have good water to use.
  I gave thanks for all of the waters the big waters all the way to the small creeks and that we’re of one mind in acknowledging them and giving thanks for all the water all over the world.
  </p>
  <p>
  I said that he made it so that he planted various types of <strong>grasses</strong> and plants all over the world.
  Now we are of one mind and giving thanks for all the grasses.
  </p>
  <p>
  I said that amongst those grasses there are <strong>medicine plants</strong>; 
  that it was intended that while we’re moving about on the earth should we become sick, that we can use these medicine plants to interrupt that illness and we use that in that way and those medicine plants.
  Even though some of us are getting forgetful and not using them they’re still here and they’re still doing their job and we’re thankful and of one mind in giving thanks for them.
  </p>
  <p>
  I said that we give thanks for all the <strong>berries</strong> and that the first berry to ripen each year is the wild <strong>strawberry</strong>; that it is a great medicine also—not only a food but a medicine as well, and that we’re very thankful.
  And whenever we see the first wild strawberries of the year we have a big ceremony where we give thanks for all the strawberries and all the berries.
  </p>
  <p>
  I said after that that we give thanks for all the <strong>animals</strong>; that the wild animals were placed here all over the world and that some of them were intended to be used as sustenance, to be used as food.
  I said that we’re giving thanks and we’re of one mind in acknowledging all the animals.
  </p>
  <p>
  I also said that we give thanks for the <strong>birds</strong> and that some of them are also here and used as food and we’re of one mind in acknowledging and giving thanks for all the birds, all the way from the big birds to the very tiny birds; and that they have a great medicine—their song.
  Their songs can lift us up and make us feel better.
  </p>
  <p>
  I also gave thanks for what we call <em class="seneca">ha’dewënö:dë:nö:de’ johehgöh</em>, this is <strong>the Sustainers of Life, the corn, beans, and squash</strong>.
  And we’re of one mind in giving thanks for these three female spirits of the
  johehgöh, and we’re of one mind and thankful for them.
  </p>
  <p>
  Working my way into the Sky World, I gave thanks for the <strong>wind</strong> and I said that
  we’re thankful that it’s moving nice and slow; that when it moves really fast it can cause great harm and destruction, and we’re thankful that it’s being merciful on us on this day.
  </p>
  <p>
  I gave thanks for <strong>Our Grandfathers the Thunderers</strong>, that they protect us and they watch over us as they go and cleanse the earth;
  also giving thanks for <strong>Our Eldest Brother the Sun</strong>, that every day he goes on his journey, and we give thanks that he’s always there and always doing his job.
  </p>
  <p>
  We also give thanks for <strong>Our Grandmother the Moon</strong>—and you notice that we view these these things, these elements, as our relatives—so we’re thankful to Grandmother Moon and that she has a great gift of bringing new life into this world and we’re thankful that she’s still doing her duties.
  </p>
  <p>
  We also give thanks for the <strong>stars</strong> in the sky. 
  And long time ago they say, my grandpa used to say, that all of those formations, all those constellations up there had Seneca names.
  Now again we’re getting forgetful, and we used to be able to travel using the stars—that was before everybody was taking out their phone and putting it in their phones, you know—so we’ve gotten away from that, but even though we’re getting forgetful the stars are always there and still doing their job and we’re thankful that they are up there.
  </p>
  <p>
  So moving on, we give thanks for a man referred to as <strong>Handsome Lake</strong>, that he listened to the word of the Creator and shared it with the people and it helped us and brought us into this into this timeframe where we are still <em class="seneca">Onöndowa’ga:’</em> people and we still have our old ceremonies and parts of our old culture.
  And we’re of one mind in giving thanks for this gift that he gave to our people.
  </p>
  <p>
  We also give thanks for the <strong>Sky Dwellers</strong>.
  The Sky Dwellers watch over us as we move about on the earth.
  And you know how it is sometimes you might do something stupid and it’s like <q>oh, I shouldn’t have done that</q>, or you barely survive it, maybe even sickness.
  It’s because these Sky Dwellers are looking after you and they keep you safe and they keep you on your path, and we’re thankful and we’re of one mind in acknowledging the Sky Dwellers.
  </p>
  <p>
  I said that we save our best words for the <strong>Creator</strong> himself, and we’re thankful that everything has been provided for us that we don’t need or shouldn’t want for anything, that it’s already here.
  And on this beautiful day as we’re here to celebrate and enjoy our combined history at this place, we are all of one mind and giving thanks.
  </p>
  <p>
  So let me hear you all say this: if you’re of one mind let me
  hear you say, <em class="seneca">nyoh</em>. 
  Very good.
  </p>
</div>
