<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<section xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="sec:relationship-colonial-exchange">
  <h1>Anti-Reciprocal Relationships: Colonizers and Seneca Song</h1>
  <section id="sec:colonial-intro">
    <p>
    In contrast to this relational approach, Euro-American colonizers failed to understand Haudenosaunee values of reciprocity, and with regard to music their relations to the Haudenosaunee might be termed anti-reciprocal.
    Settlers either ignored Haudenosaunee music, tried to suppress it and impose their own, or tried to steal it.
    In the face of ignorance and suppression, the Haudenosaunee quietly preserved their own oral traditions; 
    in the face of imposition and theft, they mastered Western music and developed protocols for sharing and withholding information from settlers.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="colonial-erasure">
    <h2>Ignorance and Erasure</h2>
    <p>
    Ignorance and erasure still characterize many settler-Haudenosaunee relationships especially regarding music.
    Little evidence has emerged that any Euro-American people took an interest in Haudenosaunee song before Lewis Henry Morgan.
    Morgan spoke highly of dance as an embodiment of Haudenosaunee
    worldview, but was content to provide only an enumeration and
    superficial description of the dances, ignoring the sound and structure of the songs completely
    <aac:citation key="Morgan:League" />.
    A century later anthropologist William Fenton made hundreds of field recordings of Bill Crouse’s relatives singing Earth Songs but published no research on them, focusing instead on the Condolence Council and restricted ceremonies
    <aac:citationList>
    <aac:citation key="Fenton:GreatLaw" />
    <aac:citation key="Fenton:SongsLonghouse" />
    <aac:citation key="FentonKurath:EagleDance" />
    </aac:citationList>.
    Dance ethnographer Gertrude Kurath worked with Fenton and published the only serious study of Haudenosaunee songs and dances, based in part on personal observations at Six Nations Ontario, the Allegany Territory, and elsewhere
    <aac:citationList>
    <aac:citation key="Kurath:IroquoisMusic" />
    <aac:citation key="Caldwell:Kurath" />
    </aac:citationList>.
    She used a custom choreographic notation to record the dance movements, though her music transcriptions are comparatively fragmentary and imprecise.
    The work of these scholars was not enough to secure a place for Haudenosaunee music in popular or scholarly accounts of American music, even though scholars in history and other fields widely recognize the central importance of the Haudenosaunee in American history.
    </p>
    <p>
    The problem with ignorance and erasure is that it causes settlers to forget that they already have an active relationship with Native people, enshrined in federal treaties
    <aac:citation key="Deloria:BrokenTreaties" />.
    Haudenosaunee people might not mind being ignored by settler society, as it could mean less disruption and less need to be concerned about appropriation.
    But when the United States <q>forgets</q> about its treaty obligations, it causes tragedies like the Kinzua Dam, when in 1961 President Kennedy violated the United States’ very first treaty with a Native nation and flooded one third of the Seneca Nation’s territory.
    </p>
    <p>
    When we asked Seneca elder Al George why people should know about Earth Songs, <aac:TODO note="actual quote">he said</aac:TODO> that his people needed to know their language and their songs so that settlers couldn’t claim they were no longer Indians and try to invalidate their treaties
    <aac:citation key="GeorgeAl:Interview-2024_03" />.
    Morgan said of the Haudenosaunee that when dance <q>loses its attractions, they will cease to be Indians</q>
    <aac:citation key="Morgan:League" pages="263" />: the paradox was that Morgan identified dance, and Indian-ness generally, as part of a traditional culture that would have to give way to Euro-American <q>civilization</q>, so that for Morgan the only way the Haudenosaunee could survive was to <q>cease to be Indians</q>.
    But what Haudenosaunee people actually did is the opposite of Morgan’s prediction: they survived as a people <em>by</em> creatively adapting their traditions.
    Keeping Earth Songs alive, therefore, is thus intensely political and anti-colonial for many Seneca singers, as a way of resisting the willful amnesia of settlers about their relationships with Native nations.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:colonial-imposition">
    <h2>Imposition and Suppression</h2>
    <p>
    If it would help the colonial cause for settlers to forget about their promises to the indigenous nations, then it would be further their goals even more if they could get the Native people to forget who they are.
    To that end, missionaries and settlers worked to impose their own music on Haudenosaunee people and suppress Native traditions.
    Though the history of colonial European music in Haudenosaunee territory has yet to be researched and is outside our scope, we note that the <aac:TODO note="source-Fenton?">Jesuit missionaries who entered Seneca territory through New France apparently taught converts at Onondaga to play violin and flute and to assist in the Mass liturgy.</aac:TODO>
    <aac:TODO note="sources?">The Anglican missionaries in Mohawk country and the Reformed missionaries in Oneida country</aac:TODO> would have imported their own traditions of hymn singing and psalmody.
    There were early attempts at translating the Bible and the <cite>Book of Common Prayer</cite> into Mohawk, though further research is needed into how these books were produced and used.
    In Seneca territory, the Buffalo Creek missionary Asher Wright published a Seneca-language newspaper that often included translations of Scriptures, prayers, and hymns
    <aac:citation key="Wright:Elevator_1846-11-17" />.
    </p>
    <p>
    Such translations helped give rise to Haudenosaunee hymn-singing societies, which are still active in some <aac:TODO note="cite diss.">Seneca communities</aac:TODO> and among the <aac:TODO note="cite">Wisconsin Oneida</aac:TODO>.
    Further research might investigate whether Haudenosaunee people made any contribution to those words, how the translation of Christian concepts adapted existing Haudenosaunee ideas, or how the poetic diction related to Native oral forms.
    It would be fascinating to investigate how indigenous concepts of vocality, rhythm, bodily movement, and other aspects of music transferred into Christian hymn singing, and whether they may have been traditional or new original Native tunes included in these collections in some form (since the sources rarely include music notation).
    </p>
    <p>
    The hymn-singing societies show that despite the missionaries’ attempt to impose European-style music, Haudenosaunee Christians brought their own relational approaches to song and community into the church.
    The practices of the Oneida Hymn Singers, though thoroughly Christian in their hymnological and theological aspects, closely follow the same deeply traditional Haudenosaunee social patterns that were developed through Earth Songs.
    The hymn singers are effectively a mutual-aid society that primarily organizes to sing at funerals and provide hope and comfort to the mourning.
    The singers’ Haudenosaunee ancestors also adapted traditional mourning practices for a new purpose when they converted the Condolence Council into the standard form for Euro-American treaty meetings.
    The same values of community mutual support later gave rise to traditional Sings.
    Haudenosaunee Christians responded to the missionaries’ anti-reciprocal imposition of music by creating a new musical form centered on reciprocity.
    </p>
    <p>
    In other types of music, Haudenosaunee people mastered Western instruments and styles and adopted them as their own.
    <aac:TODO note="cite">Wind bands</aac:TODO> were common across Iroquoia in the nineteenth century.
    Though the music they played was likely the same sort as played by settler bands, it seems likely that their social organization and functions followed distinctive Haudenosaunee patterns, just as the hymn-singing societies have done.
    The Six Nations have produced numerous professional musicians, from early <aac:TODO note="name">boarding school graduates</aac:TODO> to <aac:TODO note="cite">Robbie Robertson</aac:TODO>, one of many Native artists to contribute to the history of rock and roll.
    Haudenosaunee vocalist and composer <aac:TODO note="cite, examples">Joanne Shenandoah</aac:TODO> became one of the most widely known Native American musicians for work that was deeply rooted in her people’s traditional music while embracing New Age, folk, country, and other majority-culture genres.
    </p>
    <p>
    Haudenosaunee musicians’ creativity in mastering and adapting Western music is especially remarkable since generations of Haudenosaunee children were traumatized by boarding schools that tried to eradicate their identities as Native people.
    According to <aac:TODO note="cite interview">Doug George</aac:TODO>, a survivor of the Mohawk Institute on the Six Nations Reserve in Ontario, Canada, the sonic world of boarding schools was a central part of its damaging impact. 
    Quiet was enforced most of the time and children were punished severely for speaking Native languages.
    All night long students lay in bed listening to the sounds of abuse happening as sounds of protest and pain floated up the stairwells to the student dormitory on the top floor.
    The only singing anyone was allowed to hear or do was when children were taken to church on Sundays.
    Very occasionally the radio was played or a record player brought in.
    </p>
    <p>
    Given the central place of Earth Songs, not to mention ceremonial songs, in Haudenosaunee communities, it must have been disorienting and incapacitating for children to be completely removed from that sonic world.
    The regimentation of the body in the <aac:TODO note="read, cite article">boarding schools</aac:TODO> was a key reason dancing was forbidden, and as with the sonic experience of the ears, Haudenosaunee children’s bodies were never used to being completely still.
    Even at ceremonies children would be moving about and playing.
    Haudenosaunee dancing depends on free, natural body movements, not holding of artificial poses.
    Having to sit rigidly still and sing hymns was—by design—a disorienting, identity-negating experience.
    Morgan had said that dance was so important to the Haudenosaunee that should they ever stop dancing they would cease to be Indians, and that was precisely the goal of the boarding schools, to <q>kill the Indian to save the man</q>. 
    Something more opposed to traditional Haudenosaunee values of reciprocity could hardly be devised.
    </p>
    <p>
    For the same reason, the colonial governments banned Native dance and ceremony at <aac:TODO note="facts">various points</aac:TODO>.
    </p>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:theft">
    <h2>Theft and Appropriation</h2>
    <p>
    Ironically the restrictions on Native musical expression coincided with the rise of interest in recording and preserving Native music among anthropologists and the music scholars who would later call themselves ethnomusicologists.
    Morgan described a core subset of dances but only gave vague descriptions of how the songs sounded, including <aac:TODO note="show">one single measure of music notation</aac:TODO>.
    <aac:TODO note="cite, show">An official in Ontario</aac:TODO> notated a few tunes at the end of the nineteenth century, and these remained the only notated Haudenosaunee music until Gertrude Kurath’s studies in the 1950s.
    Kurath <aac:TODO note="cite">by her own account</aac:TODO> transcribed hundreds of Haudenosaunee song melodies and dance choreographies in her own notation system, based primarily on her first-hand observations at Six Nations, and on audio recordings of Allegany singers by Fenton.
    Of those she only published snippets of songs along with analytical diagrams.
    <aac:TODO note="example (compare); cite Levine">Her notations</aac:TODO>, like so many others of Native music, greatly oversimplified the rhythms and melodic inflections.
    </p>
    <p>
    In addition to these few attempts to notate Haudenosaunee music, settler scholars also <q>captured</q> a large number of Earth Songs in recorded form.
    Fenton published some his recordings through <aac:TODO note="cite, image">Smithsonian Folkways</aac:TODO>, even though he knew that many of them were ceremonial.
    Certainly attitudes have changed toward the more restrictive on the Allegany territory since that time, largely in response to Fenton, but even then the medicinal chants were understood to be efficacious, powerful treatments, not just tunes to be queued up on the turntable.
    Meanwhile <aac:TODO note="list, ref">hundreds of other recordings</aac:TODO> by Fenton, along with others by William Sturtevant, remain in archives, largely unheard and unstudied.
    It is hard to understand why these scholars would go to the effort of making so many recordings but then not actually study or write about their contents.
    </p>
    <p>
    The goal seems to have been simply to acquire and archive these songs.
    Archiving Earth Songs removed them from their relational purpose and made them into artifacts—objects rather than actions.
    The recordings mostly feature only one or two singers accompanying themselves, producing a markedly different effect than a full singing group with instruments.
    Solo singers had to sing both call and response in the antiphonal songs.
    One relational aspect of Fenton’s recordings is that they do often feature introductions from the singers in English and Seneca, and a few include interviews.
    But it many other ways the recordings turn participatory songs into individual performances and remove them from their context in community life.
    While the recordings are become more accessible, partly thanks to the American Philosophical Society’s decision to make portions of its archive available online and to allow tribal members unrestricted access on request, the basic fact remains that for several decades these collections have made the songs much more accessible to settler scholars than to the communities they belong to.
    The situation is all the more lamentable because so few scholars have actually used the collections.
    </p>
    <p>
    Once settlers make indigenous music into an artifact, they feel free to use it however they see fit without regard for its relational origin, as we can observe in settler appropriations of Haudenosaunee Earth Songs.
    Once any settler notates or records Native music it enters into a new life as a commodity in settler culture.
    Especially before CD recordings and then YouTube, it was too hard for settlers to get access to the oral tradition, so they relied on what they could find in books.
    The first full notation of Haudenosaunee songs, <aac:TODO note="details, cite">in the Ontario report by a government official in the late nineteenth century,</aac:TODO> made it possible for others to adapt the songs without having to learn them within the traditional context of Haudenosaunee oral teaching.
    A composer arranged a portion of <cite>Shake the Bush</cite> into a <aac:TODO note="details, cite">Victorian pseudo-Indian parlor song</aac:TODO>.
    The arrangements kept only the basic outline of pitches and rhythmic proportions and otherwise transformed the songs into nineteenth-century American sentimental songs with full piano accompaniment and invented pseudo-Native words by a white author.
    The original songs celebrate the human community’s relationship with the Earth and its plants using vocables whose only meaning is singing itself, but that did not fit settler‘s conceptions of Indian songs, which were supposed to be nostalgic laments about having to depart to the far West or even further, to the Happy Hunting Grounds in the sky.
    In other words, in a classic pattern, the authentic Indian song was <q>not Indian enough</q> for a white audience.
    The resulting faux-Indian creation might as well be <cite>On the Banks of the Wabash</cite> or any other sentimental ballad of the time, so thoroughly has it been removed from its origin.
    </p>
    <p>
    Recordings later came to serve a similar purpose—facilitating white appropriations by people without access to the original sources.
    In 1945 <aac:TODO note="details">Colin McPhee (1900–1964) made an orchestral arrangement of <cite>Four Iroquois Dances</cite> from the recordings Fenton published with Smithsonian Folkways, <cite>Songs from the Iroquois Longhouse</cite>.</aac:TODO>
    Only one of the dances is an Earth Song—Corn Dance; two of the others are ceremonial and no longer shared with outsiders (Eagle Dance and a medicine dance).
    In his arrangement of Corn Dance, McPhee only used the first minute of the recording, which is a bit like quoting only the first sentence of a Shakespeare play.
    Rather than draw on any of the fascinating musical features of the Corn Dance songs, the composer treats the piece as an exercise in orchestral tone color.
    The author gives no indication of any relationship to the Senecas, even a mental one, or even any relationship to corn (or dancing!).
    Without relationship, there can be no reciprocity, and indeed
    it seems safe to assume that not a single Seneca person is even aware
    that this adaptation exists.
    <aac:TODO note="check">Bill affirms</aac:TODO> that Seneca faithkeepers would certainly not approve any performance of these unfaithful adaptations that include restricted songs, and which present Seneca songs in the typically all-white atmosphere of the concert hall without requiring the involvement of any actual Seneca people.
    Moreover, McPhee borrows the label <q>Iroquois</q> from Fenton for these songs, disregarding the distinct Seneca origin of these recordings made at Coldspring Longhouse on the Allegeny Territory (the portion now flooded by the Kinzua Dam).
    </p>
    <p>
    These appropriations exemplify the patterns of superficial white uses of second- and third-hand verisons of Native music without regard for their context and original significance.
    They are attempts to extract the raw ore from native mines with no effrot to actually connect with people.
    They force Native music into a settler aesthetic framework.
    The arrangements imply that the original was not sufficient on its one, but only raw material for <q>real</q> music made by a Western composer, as <aac:TODO note="cite">Dylan Robinson</aac:TODO> has argued.
    </p>
    <p>
    Haudenosaunee people have escaped the worst examples of this pattern by not sharing their music more widely.
    They have restricted access to outsiders and strongly discouraged even Seneca people from putting their songs and their language into a fixed Western-style form that could be taken beyond Haudenosaunee control.
    </p>
    <p>
    Meanwhile they have made the best of the situation by using settler scholar’s recordings and recording technology as an aid to their own oral traditions.
    Archival recordings that were not supposed to leave the archive have had a way of showing up on the reservation and then being copied widely.
    The Allegany Singers recorded two versions of <aac:TODO note="link">Standing Quiver</aac:TODO> in September 2022, one led by Bill Crouse and based on continuous oral tradition, and the other led by Jake George and based on recordings that captured an earlier version of the tradition.
    <aac:TODO note="Ok to share? details?">Bill recounted</aac:TODO> the efforts over years to preserve a particular set of ceremonial songs where living singers could only remember a portion of the original song list.
    But when previously unknown archival recordings of Bill’s teachers were discovered they were able to recover all but the last of the original set of songs.
    </p>
    <p>
    Settler approaches to Haudenosaunee music in general were anti-reciprocal in that they either ignored Haudenosaunee people, took what they wanted and used it for their own purposes without returning anything, or actively did harm to them by restricting their traditional expressions and attempting to re-educate them.
    In response, the Haudenosaunee have worked to keep their songs within the relational, communal context of their oral tradition and have continued to use them for their original relational purpose.
    </p>
  </section>
</section>

