    <section id="sec:robin-relationship">
      <h2>Relationship and Reciprocity</h2>
      <p>
      The story of Robin Dance recalls several other Seneca stories in which non-human beings share songs or dances with people.
      Often they come through an intermediary person who was isolated and separate from the community.
      Bear Dance was a gift from the bears, just as Changing Rib came from the frogs, and the Green Corn songs, from the Three Sisters.
      </p>
      <p>
      The songs of Changing Rib Ceremony were brought by a young man who had left his own village for his wife and then had to leave his wife’s village as well; in that in-between space of not belonging anywhere, he found himself in a marsh full of singing frogs, who gave him their songs to use as medicine when he went back to his community.
      </p>
      <p>
      The story of Bear Dance is similar: an orphaned child was abandoned in the forest and taken in by a mother bear, who taught him the ways of the bear.
      Once he reached adulthood, she taught him songs that he could use when he returned to bring healing to his people.
      </p>
      <p>
      According to <em class="seneca">Gáíwi:yo:h’</em>, the teachings of Handsome Lake, in the late eighteenth-century days of that Seneca prophet the people’s sin was so bad that even <em class="seneca">Jöhéhgöh</em>, the Three Sisters of corn, beans, and squash, wanted to leave the land, but Sganyodaiyo’ (Handsome Lake) begged them to stay.
      They agreed to remain on the condition that the people would sing special songs for them in their ceremonies, which they taught to Sganyodaiyo’ and are still sung in the Green Corn Ceremony today.
      </p>
      <p>
      In all these cases, non-human beings chose an intermediary who was at the margins of the human community and in what anthropologists would call a <em>liminal</em> or threshold state: 
      lost in the woods (Bear and Changing Rib), at a time of community crisis (Green Corn), or on a vision quest (Robin).
      The songs were not a human’s artistic creation, but a gift from these beings to be used for a specific purpose.
      The beings gave people a way to relate to them and to draw on their power for the good of the human community.
      </p>
      <p>
      In a way this pattern recalls the way Haudenosaunee people treated Euro-Americans in the treaties of the early colonial era.
      The Haudenosaunee Confederacy was willing to treat with specific ambassadors from the colonial community who they knew and recognized, and who had enough knowledge of their language and culture, and enough humility, that the Native leaders believed they could communicate with them
      <aac:citationList>
      <aac:citation key="Richter:FacingEast" pages="129–150" />
      <aac:citation key="Richter:Ordeal" />
      <aac:citation key="Fenton:GreatLaw" />
      </aac:citationList>
      The Euro-Americans did not know how to relate to Native people, so the confederacy chiefs provided protocols for them to follow.
      They adapted the Condolence Council that they had used to mourn fallen chiefs and effectively gave it to the colonial ambassadors as the proper way to relate to them.
      They gave them the concept of the Covenant Chain, the imagery of the Tree of Peace, the Two-Row Wampum, and other cultural elements to enable a relationship on terms both sides could accept.
      Their diplomacy between <em class="seneca">ögwé’ö:weh</em> (Original People, Natives) and Euro-Americans was built on the model of relationships between humans and their non-human relatives like corn and the robin.
      </p>
      <p>
      Robin Dance, like other Earth Songs, provides a way for Seneca people to renew reciprocal relationships with the non-human world and with each other.
      The dance also provides a way for Seneca people to teach those non-Native neighbors who will listen, how to relate to them and to the natural world in a healthy way.
      </p>
    </section>
