    <p>
    Whereas <a class="internal" href="relationship.html">relationships and reciprocity</a> are ancient and integral Native concepts, the pair of terms
    <em>history</em> and <em>tradition</em> come from a distinctively Western way of thinking, especially if they are seen as opposites.
    Should we view Seneca Earth Songs as artifacts of the distant past, or as contemporary music?
    Should we teach them in a Music History course or a World Music course?
    Such questions reflect a colonial mindset that assumed that Native people lived in some kind of <q>historical present tense</q>: Euro-American scholars relegated Native people to the past while somehow also denying them a history.
    </p>
    <p>
    It is insulting to America’s first peoples to act like they do not have a history or that their history is not worth including in the stories we require our students to learn.
    It is just as ignorant, though, to teach Native culture only as something of the past without attending to its vibrant and ever-changing contemporary reality.
    It is not only Western music that has a history, and no history of American music could pretend to be accurate without taking account of Haudenosaunee music.
    At the same time, both Western and Native musics are living traditions in which things from the past are kept alive through present-day performance and for present-day purposes.
    </p>
    <p>
    Seneca Earth Songs are a living, contemporary practice that continues an ancient tradition.
    Seneca songs are certainly historical in the sense that it goes back a long way into the past, they can be verified with documentary and archeological evidence, and they changed over time as it was shaped by specific actors.
    There is a lot we can say about <q>how it was</q> with Seneca songs.
    At the same time, they are also a tradition in that we can also speak about <q>how it is</q> with Seneca songs.
    They are a contemporary practice because they are something living people do now, not something reconstructed from evidence of the past; and because they exist in active engagement with the rest of our present-day world.
    </p>
    <p>
    The songs can be documented through recordings and notation to have remained fundamentally unchanged for more than a century (except for Ë:sgä:nye:’ where new songs are constantly being created).
    As we discuss in connection with the <a class="internal" href="corn.html#sec:corn-age">Corn Dance</a>, 
    oral tradition, documentary evidence, and archeological findings all indicate that the basic patterns of song and dance in Seneca culture go back centuries, probably before the founding of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy.
    Eli Parker told Morgan in the 1840s that Seneca dances had been passed down the same way since longer than anyone could remember.
    </p>
    <p>
    At the same time, that tradition is also historical in the sense that it has changed over time.
    New <a class="internal" href="womens.html">Ë:sgä:nye:’</a> are added to the repertoire every year, while others are forgotten.
    Corn Dance used to be ceremonial, and now is social on the Allegany Territory (but not at Cattaraugus or Tonawanda).
    Songs were introduced by other nations at specific points in history, like the <a class="internal" href="relationship.html#sec:relationship-intertribal-exchange">Delaware Skin Dance</a> in the eighteenth century or Alligator Dance in the twentieth.
    </p>
    <p>
    It is also historical in the sense of having been shaped by specific, knowable actors.
    Bill Crouse stems from a pedagogical genealogy of singers, going back to Herb Dowdy, Ed Curry, Avery Jimerson, and Richard Johnny-John, and further to Richard’s father Chauncy, who recorded for William Fenton in the 1930s.
    Another singer who recorded for Fenton, Jesse Cornplanter, was a physical descendant of Chief Cornplanter, who was a personal friend of George Washington, and the song traditions he inherited also went back at least that far.
    </p>

