<!-- Gayó:waga:yöh article
  2023/03/10 begun
-->
<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="article:moccasin">
  <section id="sec:moccasin-intro">
    <p>
    <em class="seneca">Gayó:waga:yöh</em> or Old Moccasin Dance is of the stomp-dance type.
    The cultural-thematic emphasis of this dance is on dancing itself.
    It is often sung at the beginning of a set of social-dance songs, just after <a href="quiver.html">Standing Quiver</a> (which is always the first). <!-- TODO true? -->
    This dance can also be used as a medicine ceremony as part of the Midwinter Ceremonies.
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:moccasin-coldspring">
      <aac:youtube key="Ftrk4LqV4eA" />
      <figCaption>
        <em class="seneca">Gayó:waga:yöh</em>, Bill Crouse and the Allegany Singers, 
        Coldspring Cookhouse, Allegany Territory of the Seneca Nation of Indians, September 2022
      </figCaption>
    </figure>
    <!-- TODO moccasin pictures -->
  </section>
  <section id="sec:moccasin-story">
    <h1>Story</h1>
    <!-- TODO 
      - Charleston story
      - LH Morgan on moccasins?
      - archeological evidence of moccasins
      - beadwork etc.
    -->
  </section>
  <section id="sec:moccasin-songs">
    <h1>Songs</h1>
    <section id="sec:moccasin-music">
      <h2>Musical Structure</h2>
      <p>
      As is the case with other Earth Songs, the Moccasin Dance songs are quite distinct from each other but still suggest a strong family resemblance.
      They sound like they belong to the same dance even though there are different types of melodies and rhythms.
      The Moccasin Dance songs are more consistently diatonic, with most songs using six notes of the major scale (i.e., a major hexachord) and a few adding a <aac:degree accid="fl" n="7" />
      (<aac:ref type="table" href="#tab:moccasin-pitches" />).
      </p>
      <xi:include href="table-moccasin-pitches.xhtml" />
      <p>
      The lead singer introduces each song by singing the first phrase.
      Beyond that, though, these songs do not feature call-and-response; the singers continue in unison.
      The singers repeat each song once (that is, they sing it twice) and there are no other internal repeats.
      Most of the songs have three or four phrases; the phrases contrast but also echo each other, with small motives repeated or varied in subsquent phrases.
      There are several patterns of these phrases: the most common is that each phrase is different from the previous one (A B C or A B C D); in several other songs one of the phrases returns, often in a varied form (such as A B C C, A B B, A B C B, A A B B).
      <!-- TODO details
        - melodic/motivic emphasis on thirds;
        - repeated-note endings on ^1, ^2, or ^5
      -->
      </p>
      <p>
      Most of the songs emphasize the main beat.
      <!-- emphatic long-long patterns; dotted patterns
        - but some are syncopated 
      -->
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:moccasin-words">
      <h2>Words</h2>
      <p>
      The last song in both recordings by the Allegany Singers features the Seneca word for moccasin, <em class="seneca">gayó:wah</em>.
      <!-- TODO check -->
      Other songs include vocable words like <em>gayoweh</em> that sound similar, but this may just be coincidence since variants of <em>gayowaneh</em> are among the most common vocables in Seneca songs.
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="sec:moccasin-music">
      <h2>Versions</h2>
      <p>
      Bill’s teacher Avery Jimerson taught him always to begin <em class="seneca">Gayó:waga:yöh</em> with the same two songs, as heard on both Allegany Singers recordings.
      After that, Kyle Dowdy’s choices as lead in the earlier recording featured more songs that he had learned from singers on other territories, particularly Six Nations in Ontario.
      The song selection in the more recent recording (with Jacob Dowdy singing lead) are more traditional to <em class="seneca">Ohi:yo’</em>, according to Bill.
      </p>
    </section>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:moccasin-movements">
    <h1>Movements</h1>
    <p>
    Moccasin Dance uses the same step as other stomp dances like Standing Quiver and others.
    <!-- TODO which -->
    Women and men are arranged in alternation (with a man at the front) and dancers step forward with the right foot and bounce on the ball of the foot.
    They then bring their left foot forward, bouncing on the balls of the feet.
    The step lines up with the main beat (quarter note in the transcription) and the bounce with the subdivision (eighth notes).
    That motion mirrors the way the horn rattle players bring the rattle down on each beat, while the subdivision sounds automatically from the internal motion of the beads.
    </p>
    <!-- TODO do people turn during the song? -->
    <!-- anything moccasin-specific about this? -->
  </section>
</article>
