<article xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
         xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
         xmlns:aac="https://www.senecasongs.earth"
         id="article:robin">
  <section id="sec:robin-intro">
    <p>
    Robin Dance can be sung any time, but is most closely associated with the start of spring.
    The song honors the robin as a harbinger of spring after the long winter: as Bill says, <q>We’re honoring the robin, so we welcome it back</q>
    (<aac:ref  type="audio" href="#aud:robin-crouse-intro" />).
    </p>
    <figure data-medium="web" class="image" id="img:robin">
      <iframe class="manual-size" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/397866701/embed" height="511" width="640"></iframe>
      <figCaption><em class="seneca">Jö:yaik</em>, the American robin (in Lenape territory, New York, NY, photograph by Dimitris Salas, courtesy Cornell Ornithology Labs, Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <p>
    The Robin Dance songs seem to imitate the song of the <em class="seneca">jö:yaik</em> (American robin), while the side-to-side dance suggests the bird’s hopping movements.
    </p>
    <figure class="audio" id="aud:robin-crouse-intro">
      <audio>
        <source src="media/robin-intro-crouse-ur-2023.mp3" type="audio/mp3" />
      </audio>
      <figCaption>
        Bill Crouse introduces Robin Dance to students at the University of Rochester, April 11, 2023
      </figCaption>
    </figure>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-coldspring">
      <aac:youtube key="LOTbAImVAkQ" />
      <figCaption><em class="seneca">Jö:yaik oënö’</em>, Bill Crouse and the Allegany Singers (John Block, lead), Coldspring Cookhouse, Allegany Territory of the Seneca Nation of Indians, September 2022</figCaption>
    </figure>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:robin-story">
    <h1>Story</h1>
    <p>
    According to Seneca oral tradition, the Robin Dance was a gift to the people from the robin, and the robin was originally a human boy.
    That boy went out into the woods with his uncle on a vision quest, and while he was fasting and waiting for a vision, he grew ill and began to waste away.
    His uncle found him on the point of death, with his chest painted red, but the boy begged to wait another day.
    When the uncle returned the last time, he found a bird who told him,
    <q>I am your nephew. I am <em class="seneca">jö:yaik</em>,</q> the robin, and from now on he would be the sign that spring was returning.
    He gave the people his songs as a way of honoring him and the promise of spring.
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:crouse-robin-story">
      <aac:youtube key="1h-JThdY18o" />
      <figCaption>Bill Crouse tells the origin of <em class="seneca">Jö:yaik Oënö’</em>, at Allegany State Park overlooking <em class="seneca">Ohi:yo’</em> (the Allegany Territory of the Seneca Nation)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <p>
    The Seneca Robin Dance is evidence of a long, close relationship between humans and robins in this region, which Western science confirms.
    The American robin (<em class="latin">Turdus migratorius</em>) lives all across North America and probably has always lived close by humans as it does today, and it is known as <q>an accomplished and pleasing singer</q>
    <aac:citation key="GaleScience:Robins" />.
    Robins have existed in their modern form for more than 300,000 years, before humans arrived, but they have always thrived in areas settled by people because they prefer to hunt in grassy, open areas
    <aac:citation key="Gelbart:PleistoceneRobins" />.
    <!-- TODO bad source, look at Topp et al. article or other -->
    <q>Because the species is so widespread, virtually all North Americans hear, and are warmed by, the lovely melody of the robin during the spring and summer, although many people do not recognize its song as such.
    Those who do, however, widely regard the early migrating American robin to be  a longed-for harbinger of springtime and warmer weather, because this bird often arrives at the northern parts of its range and sings while there is still snow on the ground</q>
    <aac:citation key="GaleScience:Robins" />.
    </p>
    <!--
    <figure class="image" id="img:robin-family">
      <iframe class="manual-size" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/61179031/embed" height="511" width="640"></iframe>
      <figCaption>A cardinal feeds its babies a worm (photo by Terence Zahner, courtesy Cornell Ornithology Labs, Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    -->
      <!-- 
  - other scientific parallels: hopping and running motions, analysis of robin call?
  - folkloric explanations of red breast
  - significance of vision/fasting/death in story? 
  - giving thanks for birds in Ganonyok
-->
  </section>
  <section id="sec:robin-songs">
    <h1>Songs</h1>

    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-song">
      <iframe class="manual-size" height="300" width="640" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/230039991/embed"></iframe>
      <figCaption>Song of an American robin in the Conewango Swamp Wildlife Management Area, between the Cattaraugus and Allegany Territories of the Seneca Nation, near Randolph, NY (recorded by Andrew Spencer, courtesy of the Cornell Ornithology Lab, Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
  </section>
  <section id="sec:robin-movements">
    <h1>Movements</h1>
    <p>
    In the Robin Dance participants line up with all the men first followed by the women and move in a counterclockwise circle.
    First dancers face the center and shuffle sideways to their right, stepping first with the right foot then in the next step bringing the left foot over next to it.
    At the first repeat of each song (<q>Yo ho yo...</q>) the dancers turn around to face outwards, and then continue the same motions but reversed: now they step to their left with their left foot and bring the right foot next to it.
    </p>
    <p>
    The American robin is known for its distinctive style of hopping and running.
    </p>
    <figure class="video" id="vid:robin-hopping">
      <iframe class="manual-size" src="https://macaulaylibrary.org/asset/226292131/embed" height="502" width="640"></iframe>
      <figCaption>Robin hopping and pecking for worms at the Cornell Ornithology Lab in Tompkins, NY (Haudenosaunee–Cayuga territory, courtesy Macaulay Library)</figCaption>
    </figure>
    <!-- 
      - significance of gender division? (cf. robin couples seen in spring, significance of spring/mating?)
      - similarities with other animal-related songs? or season-related ones?
    -->
  </section>
</article>
 
